Published by Tuttle Publishing, an imprint of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd. Originally published in three volumes by Tuttle Publishing
in 1972 (Vol. I), 1979 (Vol. II), and 1986 (Vol. III). Volume I was originally published in Japan by the Asahi Shimbun Publishing
Company in the Japan Quarterly, Vol. XVII, No. 4, and Vol. XVIII, Nos. 1 and 2. Chapter I of Volume II was originally published in
Japan by the Asahi Shimbun Publishing Company in the Japan Quarterly, Vol. XII, No. 4.


www.tuttlepublishing.com

Copyright © 1972, 1979, 1986, 2002 (compilation) by Aiko Ito and Graeme Wilson
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior written
permission from the publisher.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2002100535


ISBN 978-1-4629-0175-3

Distributed by:


North America, Latin American & Europe Tuttle Publishing



364 Innovation Drive
North Clarendon, VT 05759-9436 U.S. A.
Tel: 1 (802) 773-8930
Fax: 1 (802) 773-6993
info@tuttlepublishing.com www.tuttlepublishing.com
Japan
Tuttle Publishing
Yaekari Building, 3rd Floor 5-4-12 Osaki, Shinagawa-ku Tokyo 141-0032
Tel: (81) 3 5437-0171
Fax: (81) 3 5437-0755
sales@tuttle.co.jp
www.tuttle.co.jp

Asia Pacific
Berkeley Books Pte. Ltd.
61 Tai Seng Avenue, #02-12
Singapore 534167
Tel: (65) 6280-1330
Fax: (65) 6280-6290
inquiries@periplus.com.sg www.periplus.com


16 15 14 13 12 11 10 20 19 18 17 16 15 14

Printed in the United States of America
Tuttle Publishing ® is a registered trademark of Tuttle Publishing, a division of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd.
               contents


Introduction              iv

Volume One                1
Chapter I                 3
Chapter II                18
Chapter III               70

Volume Two                117
Chapter I                 119
Chapter II                153
Chapter III               187
Chapter IV                224

Volume Three              263
Chapter I                 265
Chapter II                309
Chapter III               351
Chapter IV                400
                                  INTRODUCTION



         ŌSEKI NATSUME is the pen name of Kin’nosuke Natsume (1867-1916), the eighth and

S        youngest son of a family of minor town-gentry. The family’s hereditary occupation as
         ward-chiefs in Tokyo under the Tokugawa shogunate disappeared with the Meiji
         Restoration of 1868, and thus they fell upon hard times, yet Sōseki received the
compulsory modern education, both primary and at middle school level, which had been
introduced in 1872.
     In his mid-teens he switched to a private school for Chinese studies and, though upper-
class tradition regarded literature as no more than a civilized diversion, he began to toy with the
idea of adopting it as a working profession. However, extensively educated in both the Chinese
and the Japanese literary traditions, Sōseki recognized early on the importance of English to
any senior career under the westernizing influence of the restored regime and, specifically, to
the entry requirements of Tokyo Imperial University-then the only university in the capital.
Hoping to become an architect, he entered that university’s Department of Engineering in 1881,
but he soon transferred to the Department of Literature that same year. In September 1890,
Sōseki joined the Department of English Literature as a loan-scholarship student of the Ministry
of Education.
     The English department, founded in 1888, had produced only one previous graduate, a
student of the first year who became a customs inspector in Shanghai. Sōseki graduated in July
1893 and then briefly enrolled as a postgraduate student. He applied unsuccessfully for a post
as a journalist with the English-language Japan Mail in Yokohama and taught for a time at
Tokyo Normal College. ln 1895 he suddenly left Tokyo to become a provincial teacher-first in
Shikoku (where his university friend, the haiku poet Masaoka Shiki, resided) and later, in 1896,
at Kumamoto in Kyushu. There, by formal arrangement, he married Nakane Kyoko, the eldest
daughter of the chief secretary of the House of Peers. In 1900 the Ministry of Education sent
him on a miserable scholarship to London University. For two unhappy years in London, he
seems to have done nothing but read an almost incredible number of books on every
conceivable subject and, at the same time, make himself an authority on eighteenth-century
literature. His only social contacts with the British appear to have been a weekly private English
lesson with W J. Craig-subsequently the editor of the Arden Shakespeare--and a single tea
party given in Dulwich by the wife of a missionary whom he had met on the ship bringing him to
England. It is, therefore, perhaps not surprising that Sōseki formed a poor opinion of English
social life and that back in japan he was widely rumored to have gone mad.
     In 1903 he returned to Tokyo and, shortly thereafter, in fulfillment of the terms of his London
scholarship, served four years as a lecturer in English literature at Tokyo Imperial University.
During this period he began writing. He had formed various useful literary friendships while he
was a student at the university, and, though his close friend Shiki had died in 1902, the editorial
board of the influential literary magazine Hototogisu (Cuckoo), which Shiki had founded, still
included many men who were Sōseki’s personal friends.
     Takahama Kyoshi--one of the editors of Hototogisu, but not a close friend of Sōseki-
allegedly asked Soseki to write something for the magazine. Accordingly, during 1904, Sōseki
produced his first short story, which he called I Am a Cat. Takahama read it, told Sōseki that it
was no good, and, when Sōseki asked for an explanation, provided comment in considerable
detail. Today it seems ludicrous that one of the three or four best novelists ever to write in
japanese should have been glad to receive guidance from such a relatively insignificant figure
asTakahama. However, we must remember that, at that time, Takahama was a wellknown,
well-established, and very influential editor (a man with the sensitivity to divine Sōseki’s promise
and the kindness to give him guidance), while Sōseki was a virtually unknown young man who
had just produced his first, and really rather odd, short story. In any event, Sōseki appears to
have accepted the advice (though he later stated that he could not remember what that advice
had been) and rewrote the story. Takahama liked the second version and published it in the
January 1905 issue of Hototogisu.
     Sōseki had not intended to write more than that single short story, which is now the first
chapter of a very long book, but Takahama was so pleased with its immediate success that he
persuaded Sōseki to write further installments. The subsequent ten chapters that make up I Am
a Cat were thus successively published in Hototogisu’s issues for February, April, June, July,
and October 1905 and for January, March, April, and August 1906. The seventh and eighth
chapters appeared together in the issue for January 1906. This somewhat curious account of
the origin and development of Sōseki’s famous novel rests primarily upon Takahama’s testimony
in his later book Soseki and I, but there is no reason to doubt that it is substantially correct. The
actual book of I Am a Cat was first published in three-volume form, the volumes appearing in
October 1905, November 1906, and May 1907. The first single-volume edition was published in
1911.
     Takahama’s account of how this story came to be a novel explains the unevenness, even
jerkiness, of the early parts of the book. Indeed, though the first chapter is adequately
articulated into the total work, it is as clear from that chapter’s ending as from Sōseki’s own
later remarks- “When the first chapter appeared in Hototogisu, it was my intention to stop
there” -that he originally meant to write no more. There are, moreover, one or two minor points
in that first chapter that an ungenerous critic might highlight as inconsistent with subsequent
portions of the book. The second chapter, nearly the longest of them all, shows Sōseki still
feeling his way towards the right chapter length. He did not really hit his stride until the third
chapter, which finally established the tone, length, and character of the remaining eight.
     The circumstances of the book’s construction no doubt largely account for its rambling
structure and discursive content; however, Sōseki must very quickly have realized that the
technique used by Laurence Sterne for the construction of The Life and Opinions if Tristram
Shandy would very neatly solve his own problems. Though Sōseki’s total book is held together
by the continuing theme of a nameless eat’s observations on upper-middle-class Japanese
society of the Meiji period, the essence of the book resides in the humor and the sardonic truth
of those various observations, not in the development of the story. The eat’s eventual drunken
death in a water-butt comes without any particular reason or structural build-up, and one is
forced to the conclusion that Sōseki simply drowned his hero because he had run out of
sufficiently humorous observations to offer on Meiji society. Consequently, it is possible to take
almost any single chapter of the book as an isolated short story.
     It is also worth stressing the apparent oddity of choosing for the main character in one’s
first published writing a stray kitten, and a stray kit ten world-weary from the moment of its
birth. However, much of the charm of I Am a Cat resides in its diverting presentation of a eat’s
view of mankind. The satire is of man in general but the associated case for the superiority of
cats, however entertainingly and persuasively put, is not inexhaustible; so that the unique cat-
ness of the opening chapters simply could not be maintained in its original and beguiling purity
throughout the further chapters demanded by a happily insulted public. Sōseki himself was
clearly alive to these considerations, for as early as the opening paragraph of the third chapter
the cat apologizes to readers for his growing resemblance to a human being and for his
consequent new tendency to criticize humanity as though he, too, were human. Thus the satire
beginning in Chapter 3 is less specifically feline. In yet later chapters the eat’s viewpoint
becomes almost totally human, while the object of satire narrows from mankind in general
(albeit as exemplified in Meiji, middle-class society) to a concentrated satirization of the
particularities of that particular society. By· a combination of sheer literary skill and a seemingly
endless inventiveness, Sōseki contrived to maintain the vitality of his book throughout eleven
chapters and some quarter million words: but one understands why, eventually, he had no
choice but to drown his hero. It would, however, be unreasonable to denigrate the first-rate
satire of the later parts of I Am a Cat simply because they lack the full felinity, the quite
exceptional beguilement, of the earlier parts of the book. Moreover, one has only to read
Sōseki’s other comic novel Botchan (The Young Master), of 1906, with its entirely human style
of human satire, to realize that, however much humanity seeps in to soften the later portions of
I Am a Cat, even their most uncatlike passages contain that glint, that claw-flash under velvet,
which stamp them ultimately aluroid. In addition, choosing a kitten for the main character has a
two-fold meaning as Soseki was, in fact, himself a stray kitten. As soon as he was born,
Sōseki’s parents had put him out to nurse. In his first year he was adopted by the Shiobara
family. He only rejoined his own family when the Shiobaras were divorced some eight years
later. And even then he only learned that his parents were his parents from the whisperings of
servants. Sōseki lived his life as do all those who feel themselves born middle-aged.
     While at the university Sōseki wrote several other books, notably Botchan (a satire
reflecting his teaching experience at Shikoku), but he disliked university life and, rightly,
considered himself very poorly paid. He accordingly resigned as soon as he could (1907) and
became the literary editor of the Asahi Shimbun. He continued in that journal’s employment,
publishing several novels as serials in its pages, until his death in 1916 from complications
arising from the stomach troubles that plagued the last ten years of his life.



                                                 *



     Sōseki Natsume is generally recognized in Japan as the best writer of prose to have
emerged during the century since contact was re-established with the outside world in 1868.
Despite the lateness of his development as a novelist (he was only just short of forty when his
first book was published), Sōseki rapidly achieved, and has since maintained, widespread
recognition as the best of modern Japanese novelists. His literary reputation reflects not only
the variety, quality, and modernity of his novels, but the high regard still paid to his works of
scholarly criticism, to his enchanting essays, and, especially, to his poetry. His haiku, strongly
influenced by his personal friend Masaoka Shiki, were once considered outstanding but, though
they continue to be included in anthologies of modern haiku, their diminutive form was not the
natural mode for the expression of his genius. His poems in English, poor imitations of the
poorest style of Edwardian poetry, are appalling. But his many excellent poems in Chinese,
some written even in the month before his death, are the last (or, rather, the most recent)
flowering of a formidable tradition of such writing by Japanese poets which, unbroken, extends
right back to the Kaifūsō of 751. Sōseki’s deep scholarship, both in Chinese and in English
literature, eminently qualified him for that marrying of Eastern and Western traditions, which
was the declared objective of Meiji policy-makers. Unlike the majority of his contemporaries
who had learned their English in mission schools, Sōseki approached Western literature with
the wary sensitivity of a man deeply versed in the Chinese tradition.
      Sōseki was, of course, also well-versed in Japanese literature. However, oddly enough for
a man of gentle birth, the main Japanese influences upon his writing are found in the rakugo---
comic recitations by professional storytellers-to which his childhood circle had been addicted.
The rakugo techniques are especially noticeable in his masterly use of dialogue. It is also worth
stressing that, though Sōseki’s Chinese studies resulted in a style as concise as the language
traditionally used in the composition of tanka and haiku, much of the vitality of his prose writing
comes from his skilled exploitation of colloquial Japanese speech (kogotai).
      Sōseki’s writing represents a continuation into modern times of the city-culture which first
flowered in the late seventeenth century when the wealth of the towns prospering under the
Pax Tokugawa provided the economic base for an urban and specifically non-aristocratic
literature. Sōseki’s writing contains an untraditional independence of thought and attitude-a
rationalist and (in the best sense) liberal outlook-which is often contrasted with the very rigid
samurai attitude that was also prevalent during Sōseki’s time.
      Sōseki’s longer novels reflect his assiduous study of the construction and mechanisms of
the English novel and, in particular, his liking for the works of Laurence Sterne, Jonathan Swift,
and Jane Austen. He shared their sly, ironic turn of mind, and their influence’on his work was
more deep and lasting than that of George Meredith, as so frequently cited by contemporary
critics.
      There is an understandable tendency for critics of any literature to emphasize the
dependence of a writer on his predecessors, but the “game of influences” is all too frequently
played with all enthusiasm that leads to an unfair disregard of the writer’s real originality;’ So far
as Japan is concerned, there can be no doubt whatsoever that Sōseki’s originality was a main
factor in his popular success-but he also has genuine claims to originality in world literature.
World literature has, of course, a long tradition of animal-fables, animal myths, and major
groupings of stories around such figures as Renard the Fox and even Brer Rabbit. But Sōseki’s
device of dealing with a human world through animal eyes appears to be entirely original.
      Sōseki’s modernity is even more strikingly illustrated by the fact that sixty years ago the
characters in I Am a Cat (notably “the aesthete”) were all fully engaged in those comic ploys
and counter-ploys of gamesmanship, lifemanship, and one upmanship that are now usually
associated with the comparatively recent work of Stephen Potter. The passages in the first
chapter of I Am a Cat about Gibbon’s History of the French Revolution and Harrison’s
Theophano are both extremely fine examples of what Potter has called “rilking.” Similarly, the
description of the visit to a restaurant in the second chapter is a particularly well-developed
example of Potter’s comic techniques.
     Perhaps the most significant aspect of Sōseki’s work is that, while deeply conversant with
Western literature and while sharply and persistently critical of Japanese society, he remained
unswamped (even, perhaps, unimpressed) by Western enlightenment. Throughout his career he
remained essentially and uncompromisingly Japanese; his deadly serious attitude is, typically,
revealed in that comic, even coarse, account in Koto no Sorane (1905) of the protest by
Japanese badgers against contemporary Japanese infatuation with routine badger-tricks (such
as the “hypnotic method”) whose sole novelty is that their names have been exported to Japan
by “badgers in the West.” Probably for this reason Sōseki’s writings have retained their
popularity and, perhaps, even extended their influence. In a public opinion survey conducted by
the Asahi Shimbun among students and professors at four universities which still produce the
social and intellectual elite of Japan, Sōseki‘s Kokoro (The Heart of Things) of 1914 was
second only to Dostoievski’s Crime and Punishment in the list of books which had most
influenced the thinking of the interviewees. Yukiguni (Snow Country) by Nobel Prize winner
Kawabata Yasunari was seventeenth.



                                                  *



Sōseki‘s brilliant and extremely concise use of the Japanese language makes all his writings
difficult to translate. In the case of this particular book, difficulty arises with the very first word
of its title, Wagahai wa Neko de Aru. There being no English equivalent for the Japanese word
Wagahai, the main significance of that title, the comic incongruity of a mere cat, a mere stray
mewling kitten, referring to itself in so lordly a manner, cannot be conveyed to the English
reader. An additional difficulty that faces any translator of Sōseki’s work is his individual literary
style: its reflection of his deep scholarship in Chinese, Japanese, and English literature, its
consequent exploitation of a singularly wide range of reference and its unique combination of
classical and colloquial language. Such problems usually lead translators to beg the indulgence
of their readers: but forgive them not, for they know what they do.
VOLUME I
                                                 I




IAM A CAT. As yet I have no name. I’ve no idea where I was born. All I remember is that I was
 miaowing in a dampish dark place when, for the first time, I saw a human being. This human
being, I heard afterwards, was a member of the most ferocious human species; a shosei, one
of those students who, in return for board and lodging, perform small chores about the house. I
hear that, on occasion, this species catches, boils, and eats us. However as at that time I
lacked all knowledge of such creatures, I did not feel particularly frightened. I simply felt myself
floating in the air as I was lifted up lightly on his palm. When I accustomed myself to that
position, I looked at his face. This must have been the very first time that ever I set eyes on a
human being. The impression of oddity, which I then received, still remains today. First of all,
the face that should be decorated with hair is as bald as a kettle. Since that day I have met
many a cat but never have I come across such deformity. The center of the face protrudes
excessively and sometimes, from the holes in that protuberance, smoke comes out in little
puffs. I was originally somewhat troubled by such exhalations for they made me choke, but I
learnt only recently that it was the smoke of burnt tobacco which humans like to breathe.
     For a little while I sat comfortably in that creature’s palm, but things soon developed at a
tremendous speed. I could not tell whether the shosei was in movement or whether it was only
I that moved; but anyway I began to grow quite giddy, to feel sick. And just as I was thinking
that the giddiness would kill me, I heard a thud and saw a million stars. Thus far I can
remember but, however hard I try, I cannot recollect anything thereafter.
     When I came to myself, the creature had gone. I had at one time had a basketful of
brothers, but now not one could be seen. Even my precious mother had disappeared. Moreover
I now found myself in a painfully bright place most unlike that nook where once I’d sheltered. It
was in fact so bright that I could hardly keep my eyes open. Sure that there was something
wrong, I began to crawl about. Which proved painful. I had been snatched away from softest
straw only to be pitched with violence into a prickly clump of bamboo grass.
     After a struggle, I managed to scramble clear of the clump and emerged to find a wide
pond stretching beyond it. I sat at the edge of the pond and wondered what to do. No helpful
thought occurred. After a while it struck me that, if I cried, perhaps the shosei might come back
to fetch me. I tried some feeble mewing, but no one came. Soon a light wind blew across the
pond and it began to grow dark. I felt extremely hungry. I wanted to cry, but I was too weak to
do so. There was nothing to be done. However, having decided that I simply must find food, I
turned, very, very slowly, left around the pond. It was extremely painful going. Nevertheless, I
persevered and crawled on somehow until at long last I reached a place where my nose picked
up some trace of human presence. I slipped into a property through a gap in a broken bamboo
fence, thinking that something might turn up once I got inside. It was sheer chance; if the
bamboo fence had not been broken just at that point, I might have starved to death at the
roadside. I realize now how true the adage is that what is to be will be. To this very day that
gap has served as my shortcut to the neighbor’s tortoiseshell.
     Well, though I had managed to creep into the property, I had no idea what to do next. Soon
it got really dark. I was hungry, it was cold and rain began to fall. I could not afford to lose any
more time. I had no choice but to struggle toward a place which seemed, since brighter,
warmer. I did not know it then, but I was in fact already inside the house where I now had a
chance to observe further specimens of humankind. The first one that I met was O-san, the
servant-woman, one of a species yet more savage than the shosei. No sooner had she seen
me than she grabbed me by the scruff of the neck and flung me out of the house. Accepting
that I had no hope, I lay stone-still, my eyes shut tight and trusting to Providence. But the
hunger and the cold were more than I could bear. Seizing a moment when O-san had relaxed
her watch, I crawled up once again to flop into the kitchen. I was soon flung out again. I
crawled up yet again, only to be flung out yet again. I remember that the process was several
times repeated. Ever since that time, I have been utterly disgusted with this O-san person. The
other day I managed at long last to rid myself of my sense of grievance, for I squared accounts
by stealing her dinner of mackerel-pike. As I was about to be flung out for the last time, the
master of the house appeared, complaining of the noise and demanding an explanation. The
servant lifted me up, turned my face to the master and said, “This little stray kitten is being a
nuisance. I keep putting it out and it keeps crawling back into the kitchen.” The master briefly
studied my face, twisting the black hairs under his nostrils. Then, “In that case, let it stay,” he
said; and turned and went inside. The master seemed to be a person of few words. The
servant resentfully threw me down in the kitchen. And it was thus that I came to make this
house my dwelling.
     My master seldom comes face-to-face with me. I hear he is a schoolteacher. As soon as
he comes home from school, he shuts himself up in the study for the rest of the day; and he
seldom emerges. The others in the house think that he is terribly hard-working. He himself
pretends to be hard-working. But actually he works less hard than any of them think.
Sometimes I tiptoe to his study for a peep and find him taking a snooze. Occasionally his mouth
is drooling onto some book he has begun to read. He has a weak stomach and his skin is of a
pale yellowish color, inelastic and lacking in vitality. Nevertheless he is an enormous
gormandiser. After eating a great deal, he takes some taka-diastase for his stomach and, after
that, he opens a book. When he has read a few pages, he becomes sleepy. He drools onto the
book. This is the routine religiously observed each evening. There are times when even I, a
mere cat, can put two thoughts together. “Teachers have it easy. If you are born a human, it’s
best to become a teacher. For if it’s possible to sleep this much and still to be a teacher, why,
even a cat could teach.” However, according to the master, there’s nothing harder than a
teacher’s life and every time his friends come round to see him, he grumbles on and on.
     During my early days in the house, I was terribly unpopular with everyone except the
master. Everywhere I was unwelcome, and no one would have anything to do with me. The fact
that nobody, even to this day, has given me a name indicates quite clearly how very little they
have thought about me. Resigned, I try to spend as much of my time as possible with the
master, the man who had taken me in. In the morning, while he reads the newspaper, I jump to
curl up on his knees. Throughout his afternoon siesta, I sit upon his back. This is not because I
have any particular fondness for the master, but because I have no other choice; no one else to
turn to. Additionally, and in the light of other experiments, I have decided to sleep on the boiled-
rice container, which stays warm through the morning, on the quilted foot-warmer during the
evening, and out on the veranda when it is fine. But what I find especially agreeable is to creep
into the children’s bed and snuggle down between them. There are two children, one of five and
one of three: they sleep in their own room, sharing a bed. I can always find a space between
their bodies, and I manage somehow to squeeze myself quietly in. But if, by great ill-luck, one
of the children wakes, then I am in trouble. For the children have nasty natures, especially the
younger one. They start to cry out noisily, regardless of the time, even in the middle of the
night, shouting, “Here’s the cat!”Then invariably the neurotic dyspeptic in the next room wakes
and comes rushing in. Why, only the other day, my master beat my backside black and blue
with a wooden ruler.
      Living as I do with human beings, the more that I observe them, the more I am forced to
conclude that they are selfish. Especially those children. I find my bedmates utterly
unspeakable. When the fancy takes them, they hang me upside-down, they stuff my face into a
paper-bag, they fling me about, they ram me into the kitchen range. Furthermore, if I do commit
so much as the smallest mischief, the entire household unites to chase me around and
persecute me. The other day when I happened to be sharpening my claws on some straw
floor-matting, the mistress of the house became so unreasonably incensed that now it is only
with the greatest reluctance that she’ll even let me enter a matted room. Though I’m shivering
on the wooden floor in the kitchen, heartlessly she remains indifferent. Miss Blanche, the white
cat who lives opposite and whom I much admire, tells me whenever I see her that there is no
living creature quite so heartless as a human. The other day, she gave birth to four beautiful
kittens. But three days later, the shosei of her house removed all four and tossed them away
into the backyard pond. Miss Blanche, having given through her tears a complete account of
this event, assured me that, to maintain our own parental love and to enjoy our beautiful family
life, we, the cat-race, must engage in total war upon all humans. We have no choice but to
exterminate them. I think it is a very reasonable proposition. And the three-colored tomcat living
next door is especially indignant that human beings do not understand the nature of proprietary
rights. Among our kind it is taken for granted that he who first finds something, be it the head of
a dried sardine or a gray mullet’s navel, acquires thereby the right to eat it. And if this rule be
flouted, one may well resort to violence. But human beings do not seem to understand the
rights of property. Every time we come on something good to eat, invariably they descend and
take it from us. Relying on their naked strength, they coolly rob us of things which are rightly
ours to eat. Miss Blanche lives in the house of a military man, and the tomcat’s master is a
lawyer. But since I live in a teacher’s house, I take matters of this sort rather more lightly than
they. I feel that life is not unreasonable so long as one can scrape along from day to day. For
surely even human beings will not flourish forever. I think it best to wait in patience for the Day
of the Cats.
      Talking of selfishness reminds me that my master once made a fool of himself by reason of
this failing. I’ll tell you all about it. First you must understand that this master of mine lacks the
talent to be more than average at anything at all; but nonetheless he can’t refrain from trying his
hand at everything and anything. He’s always writing haiku and submitting them to Cuckoo; he
sends off new-style poetry to Morning Star; he has a shot at English prose peppered with
gross mistakes; he develops a passion for archery; he takes lessons in chanting No play-texts;
and sometimes he devotes himself to making hideous noises with a violin. But I am sorry to say
that none of these activities has led to anything whatsoever. Yet, though he is dyspeptic, he
gets terribly keen once he has embarked upon a project. He once got himself nicknamed “The
Maestro of the Water-closet” through chanting in the lavatory, but he remains entirely
unconcerned and can still be heard there chanting “I am Taira-no-Munemori.” We all say, “There
goes Munemori,” and titter at his antics. I do not know why it happened, but one fine day (a
payday roughly four weeks after I’d taken up residence) this master of mine came hurrying
home with a large parcel under his arm. I wondered what he’d bought. It turned out that he’d
purchased watercolor paints, brushes, and some special “Whatman” paper. It looked to me as
if haiku-writing, and mediaeval chanting were going to be abandoned in favor of watercolor
painting. Sure enough, from the next day on and every day for some long time, he did nothing
but paint pictures in his study. He even went without his afternoon siestas. However, no one
could tell what he had painted by looking at the result. Possibly he himself thought little of his
work; for, one day when his friend who specializes in matters of aesthetics came to visit him, I
heard the following conversation.
     “Do you know it’s quite difficult? When one sees someone else painting, it looks easy
enough; but not till one takes a brush oneself, does one realize just how difficult it is.” So said
my noble master, and it was true enough.
     His friend, looking at my master over his gold-rimmed spectacles, observed, “It’s only
natural that one cannot paint particularly well the moment one starts. Besides, one cannot paint
a picture indoors by force of the imagination only. The Italian Master, Andrea del Sarto,
remarked that if you want to paint a picture, always depict nature as she is. In the sky, there
are stars. On earth, there are sparkling dews. Birds are flying. Animals are running. In a pond
there are goldfish. On an old tree one sees winter crows. Nature herself is one vast living
picture. D’you understand? If you want to paint a picturesque picture, why not try some
preliminary sketching?”
     “Oh, so Andrea del Sarto said that? I didn’t know that at all. Come to think of it, it’s quite
true. Indeed, it’s very true.”The master was unduly impressed. I saw a mocking smile behind
the gold-rimmed glasses.
     The next day when, as always, I was having a pleasant nap on the veranda, the master
emerged from his study (an act unusual in itself) and began behind my back to busy himself
with something. At this point I happened to wake up and, wondering what he was up to, opened
my eyes just one slit the tenth of an inch. And there he was, fairly killing himself at being Andrea
del Sarto. I could not help but laugh. He’s starting to sketch me just because he’s had his leg
pulled by a friend. I have already slept enough, and I’m itching to yawn. But seeing my master
sketching away so earnestly, I hadn’t the heart to move: so I bore it all with resignation. Having
drawn my outline, he’s started painting the face. I confess that, considering cats as works of
art, I’m far from being a collector’s piece. I certainly do not think that my figure, my fur, or my
features are superior to those of other cats. But however ugly I may be, there’s no conceivable
resemblance between myself and that queer thing which my master is creating. First of all, the
coloring is wrong. My fur, like that of a Persian, bears tortoiseshell markings on a ground of a
yellowish pale grey. It is a fact beyond all argument. Yet the color which my master has
employed is neither yellow nor black; neither grey nor brown; nor is it any mixture of those four
distinctive colors. All one can say is that the color used is a sort of color. Furthermore, and very
oddly, my face lacks eyes. The lack might be excused on the grounds that the sketch is a
sketch of a sleeping cat; but, all the same, since one cannot find even a hint of an eye’s
location, it is not all clear whether the sketch is of a sleeping cat or of a blind cat. Secretly I
thought to myself that this would never do, even for Andrea del Sarto. However, I could not help
being struck with admiration for my master’s grim determination. Had it been solely up to me, I
would gladly have maintained my pose for him, but Nature has now been calling for some time.
The muscles in my body are getting pins and needles. When the tingling reached a point where
I couldn’t stand it another minute, I was obliged to claim my liberty. I stretched my front paws
far out in front of me, pushed my neck out low and yawned cavernously. Having done all that,
there’s no further point in trying to stay still. My master’s sketch is spoilt anyway, so I might as
well pad round to the backyard and do my business. Moved by these thoughts, I start to crawl
sluggishly away. Immediately, “You fool” came shouted in my master’s voice, a mixture of wrath
and disappointment, out of the inner room. He has a fixed habit of saying, “You fool” whenever
he curses anyone. He cannot help it since he knows no other swear words. But I thought it
rather impertinent of him thus unjustifiably to call me “a fool.” After all, I had been very patient
up to this point. Of course, had it been his custom to show even the smallest pleasure
whenever I jump on his back, I would have tamely endured his imprecations: but it is a bit thick
to be called “a fool” by someone who has never once with good grace done me a kindness just
because I get up to go and urinate. The prime fact is that all humans are puffed up by their
extreme self-satisfaction with their own brute power. Unless some creatures more powerful
than humans arrive on earth to bully them, there’s just no knowing to what dire lengths their fool
presumptuousness will eventually carry them.
      One could put up with this degree of selfishness, but I once heard a report concerning the
unworthiness of humans, which is several times more ugly and deplorable.
      At the back of my house there is a small tea-plantation, perhaps some six yards square.
Though certainly not large, it is a neat and pleasantly sunny spot. It is my custom to go there
whenever my morale needs strengthening; when, for instance, the children are making so much
noise that I cannot doze in peace, or when boredom has disrupted my digestion. One day, a
day of Indian summer, at about two o’clock in the afternoon, I woke from a pleasant after-
luncheon nap and strolled out to this tea-plantation by way of taking exercise. Sniffing, one after
another, at the roots of the tea plants, I came to the cypress fence at the western end; and
there I saw an enormous cat fast asleep on a bed of withered chrysanthemums, which his
weight had flattened down. He did not seem to notice my approach. Perhaps he noticed but did
not care. Anyway, there he was, stretched out at full length and snoring loudly. I was amazed at
the daring courage that permitted him, a trespasser, to sleep so unconcernedly in someone
else’s garden. He was a pure black cat. The sun of earliest afternoon was pouring its most
brilliant rays upon him, and it seemed as if invisible flames were blazing out from his glossy fur.
He had a magnificent physique; the physique, one might say, of the Emperor of Catdom. He
was easily twice my size. Filled with admiration and curiosity, I quite forgot myself. I stood
stock-still, entranced, all eyes in front of him. The quiet zephyrs of that Indian summer set
gently nodding a branch of Sultan’s Parasol, which showed above the cypress fence, and a few
leaves pattered down upon the couch of crushed chrysanthemums. The Emperor suddenly
opened his huge round eyes. I remember that moment to this day. His eyes gleamed far more
beautifully than that dull amber stuff which humans so inordinately value. He lay dead still.
Focussing the piercing light that shone from his eyes’ interior upon my dwarfish forehead, he
remarked, “And who the hell are you?”
      I thought his turn of phrase a shade inelegant for an Emperor, but because the voice was
deep and filled with a power that could suppress a bulldog. I remained dumb-struck with pure
awe. Reflecting, however, that I might get into trouble if I failed to exchange civilities, I
answered frigidly, with a false sang froid as cold as I could make it, “I, sir, am a cat. I have as
yet no name.” My heart at that moment was beating a great deal faster than usual.
     In a tone of enormous scorn, the Emperor observed, “You. . . a cat? Well, I’m damned.
Anyway, where the devil do you hang out?” I thought this cat excessively blunt-spoken.
     “I live here, in the teacher’s house.”
     “Huh, I thought as much. ’Orrible scrawny aren’t you.” Like a true Emperor, he spoke with
great vehemence.
     Judged by his manner of speech, he could not be a cat of respectable background. On the
other hand, he seemed well fed and positively prosperous, almost obese, in his oily glossiness.
I had to ask him “And you, who on earth are you?”
     “Me? I’m Rickshaw Blacky.” He gave his answer with spirit and some pride: for Rickshaw
Blacky is well-known in the neighborhood as a real rough customer. As one would expect of
those brought up in a rickshaw-garage, he’s tough but quite uneducated. Hence very few of us
mix with him, and it is our common policy to “keep him at a respectful distance.” Consequently
when I heard his name, I felt a trifle jittery and uneasy but at the same time a little disdainful of
him. Accordingly, and in order to establish just how illiterate he was, I pursued the conversation
by enquiring, “Which do you think is superior, a rickshaw-owner or a teacher?”
     “Why, a rickshaw-owner, of course. He’s the stronger. Just look at your master, almost skin
and bones.”
     “You, being the cat of a rickshaw-owner, naturally look very tough. I can see that one eats
well at your establishment.”
     “Ah well, as far as I’m concerned, I never want for decent grub wherever I go. You too,
instead of creeping around in a tea-plantation, why not follow along with me? Within a month,
you’d get so fat nobody’d recognize you.”
     “In due course I might come and ask to join you. But it seems that the teacher’s house is
larger than your boss’s.”
     “You dimwit! A house, however big it is, won’t help fill an empty belly.” He looked quite
huffed. Savagely twitching his ears, ears as sharp as slant-sliced stems of the solid bamboo,
he took off rowdily.
     This was how I first made the acquaintance of Rickshaw Blacky, and since that day I’ve run
across him many times. Whenever we meet he talks big, as might be expected from a
rickshaw-owner’s cat; but that deplorable incident which I mentioned earlier was a tale he told
me.
     One day Blacky and I were lying as usual, sunning ourselves in the tea-garden. We were
chatting about this and that when, having made his usual boasts as if they were all brandnew,
he asked me, “How many rats have you caught so far?”
     While I flatter myself that my general knowledge is wider and deeper than Blacky’s, I
readily admit that my physical strength and courage are nothing compared with his. All the
same, his point-blank question naturally left me feeling a bit confused. Nevertheless, a fact’s a
fact, and one should face the truth. So I answered “Actually, though I’m always thinking of
catching one, I’ve never yet caught any.”
     Blacky laughed immoderately, quivering the long whiskers, which stuck out stiffly round his
muzzle. Blacky, like all true braggarts, is somewhat weak in the head. As long as you purr and
listen attentively, pretending to be impressed by his rhodomontade, he is a more or less
manageable cat. Soon after getting to know him, I learnt this way to handle him. Consequently
on this particular occasion I also thought it would be unwise to further weaken my position by
trying to defend myself, and that it would be more prudent to dodge the issue by inducing him
to brag about his own successes. So without making a fuss, I sought to lead him on by saying,
“You, judging by your age, must have caught a notable number of rats?” Sure enough, he
swallowed the bait with gusto.
     “Well, not too many, but I must’ve caught thirty or forty,” was his triumphant answer. “I can
cope,” he went on, “with a hundred or two hundred rats, any time and by myself. But a weasel,
no. That I just can’t take. Once I had a hellish time with a weasel.”
     “Did you really?” I innocently offered. Blacky blinked his saucer eyes but did not
discontinue.
     “It was last year, the day for the general housecleaning. As my master was crawling in
under the floorboards with a bag of lime, suddenly a great, dirty weasel came whizzing out.”
     “Really?” I make myself look impressed.
     “I say to myself, ‘So what’s a weasel? Only a wee bit bigger than a rat.’ So I chase after it,
feeling quite excited and finally I got it cornered in a ditch.”
     “That was well done,” I applaud him.
     “Not in the least. As a last resort it upped its tail and blew a filthy fart. Ugh! The smell of it!
Since that time, whenever I see a weasel, I feel poorly.” At this point, he raised a front paw and
stroked his muzzle two or three times as if he were still suffering from last year’s stench.
     I felt rather sorry for him and, in an effort to cheer him up, said, “But when it comes to rats,
I expect you just pin them down with one hypnotic glare. And I suppose that it’s because you’re
such a marvelous ratter, a cat well nourished by plenty of rats, that you are so splendidly fat
and have such a good complexion.” Though this speech was meant to flatter Blacky, strangely
enough it had precisely the opposite effect. He looked distinctly cast down and replied with a
heavy sigh.
     “It’s depressing,” he said, “when you come to think of it. However hard one slaves at
catching rats. . . In the whole wide world there’s no creature more brazen-faced than a human
being. Every rat I catch they confiscate, and they tote them off to the nearest police-box. Since
the copper can’t tell who caught the rats, he just pays up a penny a tail to anyone that brings
them in. My master, for instance, has already earned about half a crown purely through my
efforts, but he’s never yet stood me a decent meal. The plain fact is that humans, one and all,
are merely thieves at heart.”
     Though Blacky’s far from bright, one cannot fault him in this conclusion. He begins to look
extremely angry and the fur on his back stands up in bristles. Somewhat disturbed by Blacky’s
story and reactions, I made some vague excuse and went off home. But ever since then I’ve
been determined never to catch a rat. However, I did not take up Blacky’s invitation to become
his associate in prowling after dainties other than rodents. I prefer the cozy life, and it’s
certainly easier to sleep than to hunt for titbits. Living in a teacher’s house, it seems that even a
cat acquires the character of teachers. I’d best watch out lest, one of these days, I, too,
become dyspeptic.



    Talking of teachers reminds me that my master seems to have recently realized his total
    incapacity as a painter of watercolors; for under the date of December 1st his diary
    contains the following passage: At today’s gathering I met for the first time a man who
    shall be nameless. He is said to have led a fast life. Indeed he looks very much a man of
    the world. Since women like this type of person, it might be more appropriate to say that
    he has been forced to lead, rather than that he has led, a fast life. I hear his wife was
    originally a geisha. He is to be envied. For the most part, those who carp at rakes are
    those incapable of debauchery. Further, many of those who fancy themselves as
    rakehells are equally incapable of debauchery. Such folk are under no obligation to live
    fast lives, but do so of their own volition. So I in the matter of watercolors. Neither of us
    will ever make the grade. And yet this type of debauchee is calmly certain that only he is
    truly a man of the world. If it is to be accepted that a man can become a man of the
    world by drinking saké in restaurants, or by frequenting houses of assignation, then it
    would seem to follow that I could acquire a name as a painter of watercolors. The notion
    that my watercolor pictures will be better if I don’t actually paint them leads me to
    conclude that a boorish country-bumpkin is in fact far superior to such foolish men of the
    world.



    His observations about men of the world strike me as somewhat unconvincing. In particular
his confession of envy in respect of that wife who’d worked as a geisha is positively imbecile
and unworthy of a teacher. Nevertheless his assessment of the value of his own watercolor
painting is certainly just. Indeed my master is a very good judge of his own character but still
manages to retain his vanity. Three days later, on December 4th, he wrote in his diary:



    Last night I dreamt that someone picked up one of my watercolor paintings which I,
    thinking it worthless, had tossed aside. This person in my dream put the painting in a
    splendid frame and hung it up on a transom. Staring at my work thus framed, I realized
    that I have suddenly become a true artist. I feel exceedingly pleased. I spend whole days
    just staring at my handiwork, happy in the conviction that the picture is a masterpiece.
    Dawn broke and I woke up, and in the morning sunlight it was obvious that the picture
    was still as pitiful an object as when I painted it.



    The master, even in his dreams, seems burdened with regrets about his watercolors. And
men who accept the burdens of regret, whether in respect of watercolors or of anything else,
are not the stuff that men of the world are made of.
    The day after my master dreamt about the picture, the aesthete in the gold-rimmed
spectacles paid a call upon him. He had not visited for some long time. As soon as he was
seated he inquired, “And how is the painting coming along?”
    My master assumed a nonchalant air and answered, “Well, I took your advice and I am
now busily engaged in sketching. And I must say that when one sketches one seems to
apprehend those shapes of things, those delicate changes of color, which hitherto had gone
unnoticed. I take it that sketching has developed in the West to its present remarkable condition
solely as the result of the emphasis which, historically, has always there been placed upon the
essentiality thereof. Precisely as Andrea del Sarto once observed.” Without even so much as
alluding to the passage in his diary, he speaks approvingly of Andrea del Sarto.
     The aesthete scratched his head, and remarked with a laugh, “Well actually that bit about
del Sarto was my own invention.”
     “What was?” My master still fails to grasp that he’s been tricked into making a fool of
himself.
     “Why, all that stuff about Andrea del Sarto whom you so particularly admire, I made it all
up. I never thought you’d take it seriously.” He laughed and laughed, enraptured with the
situation.
     I overheard their conversation from my place on the veranda and I could not help wondering
what sort of entry would appear in the diary for today. This aesthete is the sort of man whose
sole pleasure lies in bamboozling people by conversation consisting entirely of humbug. He
seems not to have thought of the effect his twaddle about Andrea del Sarto must have on my
master’s feelings, for he rattled on proudly, “Sometimes I cook up a little nonsense and people
take it seriously, which generates an aesthetic sensation of extreme comicality which I find
interesting. The other day, I told a certain undergraduate that Nicholas Nickleby had advised
Gibbon to cease using French for the writing of his masterpiece, The History of the French
Revolution, and had indeed persuaded Gibbon to publish it in English. Now this undergraduate
was a man of almost eidetic memory, and it was especially amusing to hear him repeating what
I told him, word for word and in all seriousness, to a debating session of the Japan Literary
Society. And d’you know, there were nearly a hundred in his audience, and all of them sat
listening to his drivel with the greatest enthusiasm! In fact, I’ve another, even better, story. The
other day, when I was in the company of some men of letters, one of them happened to
mention Theofano, Ainsworth’s historical novel of the Crusades. I took the occasion to remark
that it was a quite outstanding romantic monograph and added the comment that the account of
the heroine’s death was the epitome of the spectral. The man sitting opposite to me, one who
has never uttered the three words ‘I don’t know,’ promptly responded that those particular
paragraphs were indeed especially fine writing. From which observation I became aware that
he, no more than I, had ever read the book.”
     Wide-eyed, my poor dyspeptic master asked him, “Fair enough, but what would you do if
the other party had in fact read the book?” It appears that my master is not worried about the
dishonesty of the deception, merely about the possible embarrassment of being caught out in a
lie. The question leaves the aesthete utterly unfazed.
     “Well, if that should happen, I’d say I’d mistaken the title or something like that,” and again,
quite unconcerned, he gave himself to laughter.
     Though nattily tricked out in gold-rimmed spectacles, his nature is uncommonly akin to that
of Rickshaw Blacky. My master said nothing, but blew out smoke rings as if in confession of his
own lack of such audacity. The aesthete (the glitter of whose eyes seemed to be answering,
“and no wonder; you, being you, could not even cope with watercolors”) went on aloud. “But,
joking apart, painting a picture’s a difficult thing. Leonardo da Vinci is supposed to have once
told his pupils to make drawings of a stain on the Cathedral wall. The words of a great teacher.
In a lavatory for instance, if absorbedly one studies the pattern of the rain leaks on the wall, a
staggering design, a natural creation, invariably emerges. You should keep your eyes open and
try drawing from nature. I’m sure you could make something interesting.”
     “Is this another of your tricks?”
     “No; this one, I promise, is seriously meant. Indeed, I think that that image of the lavatory
wall is really rather witty, don’t you? Quite the sort of thing da Vinci would have said.”
     “Yes, it’s certainly witty,” my master somewhat reluctantly conceded. But I do not think he
has so far made a drawing in a lavatory.
     Rickshaw Blacky has recently gone lame. His glossy fur has thinned and gradually grown
dull. His eyes, which I once praised as more beautiful than amber, are now bleared with mucus.
What I notice most is his loss of all vitality and his sheer physical deterioration. When last I saw
him in the tea garden and asked him how he was, the answer was depressingly precise: “I’ve
had enough of being farted at by weasels and crippled with side-swipes from the fishmonger’s
pole.”
     The autumn leaves, arranged in two or three scarlet terraces among the pine trees, have
fallen like ancient dreams. The red and white sasan-quas near the garden’s ornamental basin,
dropping their petals, now a white and now a red one, are finally left bare. The wintry sun along
the ten-foot length of the southwards-facing veranda goes down daily earlier than yesterday.
Seldom a day goes by but a cold wind blows. So my snoozes have been painfully curtailed.
     The master goes to school every day and, as soon as he returns, shuts himself up in the
study. He tells all visitors that he’s tired of being a teacher. He seldom paints. He’s stopped
taking his taka-diastase, saying it does no good. The children, dear little things, now trot off,
day after day, to kindergarten: but on their return, they sing songs, bounce balls and sometimes
hang me up by the tail.
     Since I do not receive any particularly nourishing food, I have not grown particularly fat; but
I struggle on from day to day keeping myself more or less fit and, so far, without getting
crippled. I catch no rats. I still detest that O-san. No one has yet named me but, since it’s no
use crying for the moon, I have resolved to remain for the rest of my life a nameless cat in the
house of this teacher.
                                                II



         INCE New Year’s Day I have acquired a certain modest celebrity: so that, though only a

S        cat, I am feeling quietly proud of myself. Which is not unpleasing.
              On the morning of New Year’s Day, my master received a picture-postcard, a card
         of New Year greetings from a certain painter-friend of his. The upper part was painted
red, the lower deep green; and right in the center was a crouching animal painted in pastel. The
master, sitting in his study, looked at this picture first one way up and then the other. “What fine
coloring!” he observed. Having thus expressed his admiration, I thought he had finished with the
matter. But no, he continued studying it, first sideways and then longways. In order to examine
the object he twists his body, then stretches out his arms like an ancient studying the Book of
Divinations and then, turning to face the window, he brings it in to the tip of his nose. I wish he
would soon terminate this curious performance, for the action sets his knees asway and I find it
hard to keep my balance. When at long last the wobbling began to diminish, I heard him mutter
in a tiny voice, “I wonder what it is.” Though full of admiration for the colors on the picture-
postcard, he couldn’t identify the animal painted in its center. Which explained his extraordinary
antics. Could it perhaps really be a picture more difficult to interpret than my own first glance
had suggested? I half-opened my eyes and looked at the painting with an imperturbable
calmness. There could be no shadow of a doubt: it was a portrait of myself. I do not suppose
that the painter considered himself an Andrea del Sarto, as did my master; but, being a painter,
what he had painted, both in respect of form and of color, was perfectly harmonious. Any fool
could see it was a cat. And so skillfully painted that anyone with eyes in his head and the
mangiest scrap of discernment would immediately recognize that it was a picture of no other
cat but me. To think that anyone should need to go to such painful lengths over such a blatantly
simple matter. . . I felt a little sorry for the human race. I would have liked to have let him know
that the picture is of me. Even if it were too difficult for him to grasp that particularity, I would
still have liked to help him see that the painting is of a cat. But since heaven has not seen fit to
dower the human animal with an ability to understand cat language, I regret to say that I let the
matter be.
      Incidentally, I would like to take the occasion of this incident to advise my readers that the
human habit of referring to me in a scornful tone of voice as some mere trifling “cat” is an
extremely bad one. Humans appear to think that cows and horses are constructed from
rejected human material, and that cats are constructed from cow pats and horse dung. Such
thoughts, objectively regarded, are in very poor taste though they are no doubt not uncommon
among teachers who, ignorant even of their ignorance, remain self-satisfied with their quaint
puffed-up ideas of their own unreal importance. Even cats must not be treated roughly or taken
for granted. To the casual observer it may appear that all cats are the same, facsimiles in form
and substance, as indistinguishable as peas in a pod; and that no cat can lay claim to
individuality. But once admitted to feline society, that casual observer would very quickly realize
that things are not so simple, and that the human saying that “people are freaks” is equally true
in the world of cats. Our eyes, noses, fur, paws—all of them differ. From the tilt of one’s
whiskers to the set of one’s ears, down to the very hang of one’s tail, we cats are sharply
differentiated. In our good looks and our poor looks, in our likes and dislikes, in our refinement
and our coarsenesses, one may fairly say that cats occur in infinite variety. Despite the fact of
such obvious differentiation, humans, their eyes turned up to heaven by reason of the elevation
of their minds or some such other rubbish, fail to notice even obvious differences in our external
features, that our characters might be characteristic is beyond their comprehension. Which is to
be pitied. I understand and endorse the thought behind such sayings as, the cobbler should
stick to his last, that birds of a feather flock together, that rice-cakes are for rice-cake makers.
For cats, indeed, are for cats. And should you wish to learn about cats, only a cat can tell you.
Humans, however advanced, can tell you nothing on this subject. And inasmuch as humans are,
in fact, far less advanced than they fancy themselves, they will find it difficult even to start
learning about cats. And for an unsympathetic man like my master there’s really no hope at all.
He does not even understand that love can never grow unless there is at least a complete and
mutual understanding. Like an ill-natured oyster, he secretes himself in his study and has never
once opened his mouth to the outside world. And to see him there, looking as though he alone
has truly attained enlightenment, is enough to make a cat laugh. The proof that he has not
attained enlightenment is that, although he has my portrait under his nose, he shows no sign of
comprehension but coolly offers such crazy comment as, “perhaps, this being the second year
of the war against the Russians, it is a painting of a bear.”
     As, with my eyes closed, I sat thinking these thoughts on my master’s knees, the servant-
woman brought in a second picture-postcard. It is a printed picture of a line of four or five
European cats all engaged in study, holding pens or reading books. One has broken away from
the line to perform a simple Western dance at the corner of their common desk. Above this
picture “I am a cat” is written thickly in Japanese black ink. And down the right-hand side there
is even a haiku stating that “on spring days cats read books or dance.”The card is from one of
the master’s old pupils and its meaning should be obvious to anyone. However my dimwitted
master seems not to understand, for he looked puzzled and said to himself, “Can this be a Year
of the Cat?” He just doesn’t seem to have grasped that these postcards are manifestations of
my growing fame.
     At that moment the servant brought in yet a third postcard. This time the postcard has no
picture, but alongside the characters wishing my master a happy New Year, the correspondent
has added those for, “Please be so kind as to give my best regards to the cat.” Bone-headed
though he is, my master does appear to get the message when it’s written out thus
unequivocally: for he glanced down at my face and, as if he really had at last comprehended
the situation, said, “hmm.” And his glance, unlike his usual ones, did seem to contain a new
modicum of respect. Which was quite right and proper considering the fact that it is entirely due
to me that my master, hitherto a nobody, has suddenly begun to get a name and to attract
attention.
     Just then the gate-bell sounded: tinkle-tinkle, possibly even ting-ting. Probably a visitor. If
so, the servant will answer. Since I never go out of my way to investigate callers, except the
fishmonger’s errand-boy, I remained quietly on my master’s knees. The master, however,
peered worriedly toward the entrance as if duns were at the door. I deduce that he just doesn’t
like receiving New Year’s callers and sharing a convivial tot. What a marvellous way to be. How
much further can pure bigotry go? If he doesn’t like visitors, he should have gone out himself,
but he lacks even that much enterprise. The inaudacity of his clam-like character grows daily
more apparent. A few moments later the servant comes in to say that Mr. Coldmoon has
called. I understand that this Coldmoon person was also once a pupil of my master’s and that,
after leaving school, he so rose in the world to be far better known than his teacher. I don’t
know why, but this fellow often comes round for a chat. On every such visit he babbles on, with
a dreadful sort of coquettishness, about being in love or not in love with somebody or other;
about how much he enjoys life or how desperately he is tired of it. And then he leaves. It is
quaint enough that to discuss such matters he should seek the company of a withered old nut
like my master, but it’s quainter still to see my mollusk opening up to comment, now and again,
on Coldmoon’s mawkish maunderings.
     “I’m afraid I haven’t been round for quite some time. Actually, I’ve been as busy as, busy
since the end of last year, and, though I’ve thought of going out often enough, somehow shanks’
pony has just not headed here.” Thus, twisting and untwisting the fastening-strings of his short
surcoat, Coldmoon babbled on.
     “Where then did shanks’ pony go?” my master enquired with a serious look as he tugged at
the cuffs of his worn, black, crested surcoat. It is a cotton garment unduly short in the sleeves,
and some of its nonde-script, thin, silk lining sticks out about a half an inch at the cuffs.
     “As it were in various directions,” Coldmoon answered, and then laughed. I notice that one
of his front teeth is missing.
     “What’s happened to your teeth?” asks my master, changing the subject.
     “Well, actually, at a certain place I ate mushrooms.”
     “What did you say you ate?”
     “A bit of mushroom. As I tried to bite off a mushroom’s umbrella with my front teeth, a tooth
just broke off.”
     “Breaking teeth on a mushroom sounds somewhat senile. An image possibly appropriate to
a haiku but scarcely appropriate to the pursuit of love,” remarked my master as he tapped
lightly on my head with the palm of his hand.
     “Ah! Is that the cat? But he’s quite plump! Sturdy as that, not even Rickshaw Blacky could
beat him up. He certainly is a most splendid beast.” Coldmoon offers me his homage.
     “He’s grown quite big lately,” responds my master, and proudly smacks me twice upon the
head. I am flattered by the compliment but my head feels slightly sore.
     “The night before last, what’s more, we had a little concert,” said Coldmoon going back to
his story.
     “Where?”
     “Surely you don’t have to know where. But it was quite interesting, three violins to a piano
accompaniment. However unskilled, when there are three of them, violins sound fairly good.
Two of them were women and I managed to place myself between them. And I myself, I
thought, played rather well.”
     “Ah, and who were the women?” enviously my master asks. At first glance my master
usually looks cold and hard; but, to tell the truth, he is by no means indifferent to women. He
once read in a Western novel of a man who invariably fell partially in love with practically every
woman that he met. Another character in the book somewhat sarcastically observed that, as a
rough calculation, that fellow fell in love with just under seven-tenths of the women he passed in
the street. On reading this, my master was struck by its essential truth and remained deeply
impressed. Why should a man so impressionable lead such an oysterish existence? A mere cat
such as I cannot possibly understand it. Some say it is the result of a love affair that went
wrong; some say it is due to his weak stomach; while others simply state that it’s because he
lacks both money and audacity. Whatever the truth, it doesn’t much matter since he’s a person
of insufficient importance to affect the history of his period. What is certain is that he did
enquire enviously about Coldmoon’s female fiddlers. Coldmoon, looking amused, picked up a
sliver of boiled fishpaste in his chopsticks and nipped at it with his remaining front teeth. I was
worried lest another should fall out. But this time it was all right.
     “Well, both of them are daughters of good families. You don’t know them,” Coldmoon coldly
answered.
     The master drawled “Is—th-a-t—,” but omitted the final “so” which he’d intended.
     Coldmoon probably considered it was about time to be off, for he said, “What marvellous
weather. If you’ve nothing better to do, shall we go out for a walk? As a result of the fall of Port
Arthur,” he added encouragingly, “the town’s unusually lively.”
     My master, looking as though he would sooner discuss the identity of the female fiddlers
than the fall of Port Arthur, hesitated for a moment’s thought. But he seemed finally to reach a
decision, for he stood up resolutely and said, “All right, let’s go out.” He continues to wear his
black cotton crested surcoat and, thereunder, a quilted kimono of hand-woven silk which,
supposedly a keep-sake of his elder brother, he has worn continuously for twenty years. Even
the most strongly woven silk, cannot survive such unremitting, such preternaturally, perennial
wear. The material has been worn so thin that, held against the light, one can see the patches
sewn on here and there from the inner side. My master wears the same clothes throughout
December and January, not bothering to observe the traditional New Year change. He makes,
indeed, no distinction between workaday and Sunday clothes. When he leaves the house he
saunters out in whatever dress he happens to have on. I do not know whether this is because
he has no other clothes to wear or whether, having such clothes, he finds it too much of a bore
to change into them. Whatever the case, I can’t conceive that these uncouth habits are in any
way connected with disappointment in love.
     After the two men left, I took the liberty of eating such of the boiled fishpaste as Coldmoon
had not already devoured. I am, these days, no longer just a common, old cat. I consider
myself at least as good as those celebrated in the tales of Momokawa Joen or as that cat of
Thomas Gray’s, which trawled for goldfish. Brawlers such as Rickshaw Blacky are now
beneath my notice. I don’t suppose anyone will make a fuss if I sneak a bit of fishpaste.
Besides, this habit of taking secret snacks between meals is by no means a purely feline
custom. O-san, for instance, is always pinching cakes and things, which she gobbles down
whenever the mistress leaves the house. Nor is O-san the only offender: even the children, of
whose refined upbringing the mistress is continually bragging, display the selfsame tendency.
Only a few days ago that precious pair woke at some ungodly hour, and, though their parents
were still sound asleep, took it upon themselves to sit down, face-to-face, at the dining-table.
Now it is my master’s habit every morning to consume most of a loaf of bread, and to give the
children scraps thereof which they eat with a dusting of sugar. It so happened that on this day
the sugar basin was already on the table, even a spoon stuck in it. Since there was no one
there to dole them out their sugar, the elder child scooped up a spoonful and dumped it on her
plate. The younger followed her elder’s fine example and spooned an equal pile of sugar onto
another plate. For a brief while these charming creatures just sat and glared at each other.
Then the elder girl scooped a second spoonful onto her plate, and the younger one proceeded
to equalize the position. The elder sister took a third spoonful and the younger, in a splendid
spirit of rivalry, followed suit. And so it went on until both plates were piled high with sugar and
not one single grain remained in the basin. My master thereupon emerged from his bedroom
rubbing half-sleepy eyes and proceeded to return the sugar, so laboriously extracted by his
daughters, back into the sugar-basin. This incident suggests that, though egotistical
egalitarianism may be more highly developed among humans than among cats, cats are the
wiser creatures. My advice to the children would have been to lick the sugar up quickly before it
became massed into such senseless pyramids, but, because they cannot understand what I
say, I merely watched them in silence from my warm, morning place on top of the container for
boiled rice.
     My master came home late last night from his expedition with Coldmoon. God knows
where he went, but it was already past nine before he sat down at the breakfast table. From
my same old place I watched his morose consumption of a typical New Year’s breakfast of
rice-cakes boiled with vegetables, all served up in soup. He takes endless helpings. Though the
rice-cakes are admittedly small, he must have eaten some six or seven before leaving the last
one floating in the bowl. “I’ll stop now,” he remarked and laid his chopsticks down. Should
anyone else behave in such a spoilt manner, he could be relied upon to put his foot down: but,
vain in the exercise of his petty authority as master of the house, he seems quite unconcerned
by the sight of the corpse of a scorched rice-cake drowning in turbid soup. When his wife took
taka-diastase from the back of a small cupboard and put it on the table, my master said, “I
won’t take it, it does me no good.”
     “But they say it’s very good after eating starchy things. I think you should take some.” His
wife wants him to take it.
     “Starchy or not, the stuff’s no good.” He remains stubborn.
     “Really, you are a most capricious man,” the mistress mutters as though to herself.
     “I’m not capricious, the medicine doesn’t work.”
     “But until the other day you used to say it worked very well and you used to take it every
day, didn’t you?”
     “Yes, it did work until that other day, but it hasn’t worked since then,” an antithetical
answer.
     “If you continue in these inconsistencies, taking it one day and stopping it the next, however
efficacious the medicine may be, it will never do you any good. Unless you try to be a little
more patient, dyspepsia, unlike other illnesses, won’t get cured, will it?” and she turns to O-san
who was serving at the table.
     “Quite so, madam. Unless one takes it regularly, one cannot find out whether a medicine is
a good one or a bad one.” O-san readily sides with the mistress.
     “I don’t care. I don’t take it because I don’t take it. How can a mere woman understand
such things? Keep quiet.”
     “All right. I’m merely a woman,” she says pushing the taka-diastase toward him, quite
determined to make him see he is beaten. My master stands up without saying a word and
goes off into his study. His wife and servant exchange looks and giggle. If on such occasions I
follow him and jump up onto his knees, experience tells me that I shall pay dearly for my folly.
Accordingly, I go quietly round through the garden and hop up onto the veranda outside his
study. I peeped through the slit between the paper sliding doors and found my master
examining a book by somebody called Epictetus. If he could actually understand what he’s
reading, then he would indeed be worthy of praise. But within five or six minutes he slams the
book down on the table, which is just what I’d suspected. As I sat there watching him, he took
out his diary and made the following entry.



    Took a stroll with Coldmoon round Nezu, Ueno, Ikenohata and Kanda. At Ikenohata,
    geishas in formal spring kimono were playing battledore and shuttlecock in front of a
    house of assignation. Their clothes beautiful, but their faces extremely plain. It occurs to
    me that they resemble the cat at home.



    I don’t see why he should single me out as an example of plain features. If I went to a
barber and had my face shaved, I wouldn’t look much different from a human. But, there you
are, humans are conceited and that’s the trouble with them.



    As we turned at Hotan’s corner another geisha appeared. She was slim, well-shaped and
    her shoulders were most beautifully sloped. The way she wore her mauve kimono gave
    her a genuine elegance. “Sorry about last night, Gen-chan—I was so busy. . .” She
    laughed and one glimpsed white teeth. Her voice was so harsh, as harsh as that of a
    roving crow, that her otherwise fine appearance diminished in enchantment. So much so
    that I didn’t even bother to turn around to see what sort of person this Gen-chan was, but
    sauntered on toward Onarimachi with my hands tucked inside the breast-fold of my
    kimono. Coldmoon, however, seemed to have become a trifle fidgety.



     There is nothing more difficult than understanding human mentality. My master’s present
mental state is very far from clear; is he feeling angry or lighthearted, or simply seeking solace
in the scribblings of some dead philosopher? One just can’t tell whether he’s mocking the world
or yearning to be accepted into its frivolous company; whether he is getting furious over some
piddling little matter or holding himself aloof from worldly things. Compared with such
complexities, cats are truly simple. If we want to eat, we eat; if we want to sleep, we sleep;
when we are angry, we are angry utterly; when we cry, we cry with all the desperation of
extreme commitment to our grief. Thus we never keep things like diaries. For what would be
the point? No doubt human beings like my two-faced master find it necessary to keep diaries in
order to display in a darkened room that true character so assiduously hidden from the world.
But among cats both our four main occupations (walking, standing, sitting, and lying down) and
such incidental activities as excreting waste are pursued quite openly. We live our diaries, and
consequently have no need to keep a daily record as a means of maintaining our real
characters. Had I the time to keep a diary, I’d use that time to better effect; sleeping on the
veranda.
    We dined somewhere in Kanda. Because I allowed myself one or two cups of saké
    (which I had not tasted for quite a time), my stomach this morning feels extremely well. I
    conclude that the best remedy for a stomach ailment is saké at suppertime. Taka-
    diastase just won’t do. Whatever claims are made for it, it’s just no good. That which
    lacks effect will continue to lack effect.



    Thus with his brush he smears the good name of taka-diastase. It is as though he
quarreled with himself, and in this entry one can see a last flash of this morning’s ugly mood.
Such entries are perhaps most characteristic of human mores.



    The other day, Mr. X claimed that going without one’s breakfast helped the stomach. So I
    took no breakfast for two or three days but the only effect was to make my stomach
    grumble. Mr. Y strongly advised me to refrain from eating pickles. According to him, all
    disorders of the stomach originate in pickles. His thesis was that abstinence from pickles
    so dessicates the sources of all stomach trouble, that a complete cure must follow. For
    at least a week no pickle crossed my lips, but, since that banishment produced no
    noticeable effect, I have resumed consuming them. According to Mr. Z, the one true
    remedy is ventral massage. But no ordinary massage of the stomach would suffice. It
    must be massage in accordance with the old-world methods of the Minagawa School.
    Massaged thus once, or at most twice, the stomach would be rid of every ill. The wisest
    scholars, such as Yasui Sokuken, and the most resourceful heroes, such as Sakamoto
    Ryoma, all relied upon this treatment. So off I went to Kaminegishi for an immediate
    massage. But the methods used were of inordinate cruelty. They told me, for instance,
    that no good could be hoped for unless one’s bones were massaged; that it would be
    difficult properly to eradicate my troubles unless, at least once, my viscera were totally
    inverted. At all events, a single session reduced my body to the condition of cotton-wool
    and I felt as though I had become a lifelong sufferer from sleeping sickness. I never went
    there again. Once was more than enough. Then Mr. A assured me that one shouldn’t eat
    solids. So I spent a whole day drinking nothing but milk. My bowels gave forth heavy
    plopping noises as though they had been swamped, and I could not sleep all night. Mr. B
    states that exercising one’s intestines by diaphragmic breathing produces a naturally
    healthy stomach and he counsels me to follow his advice. And I did try. For a time. But it
    proved no good for it made my bowels queasy. Besides, though every now and again I
    strive with all my heart and soul to control my breathing with the diaphragm, in five or six
    minutes I forget to discipline my muscles. And if I concentrate on maintaining that
    discipline I get so midriff-minded that I can neither read nor write. Waverhouse, my
    aesthete friend, once found me thus breathing in pursuit of a naturally healthy stomach
    and, rather unkindly, urged me, as a man, to terminate my labor-pangs. So diaphragmic
    breathing is now also a thing of the past. Dr. C recommends a diet of buckwheat
    noodles. So buckwheat noodles it was, alternately in soup and served cold after boiling.
    It did nothing, except loosen my bowels. I have tried every possible means to cure my
    ancient ailment, but all of them are useless. But those three cups of saké which I drank
    last night with Coldmoon have certainly done some good. From now on, I will drink two or
    three cups each evening.



      I doubt whether this saké treatment will be kept up very long. My master’s mind exhibits the
same incessant changeability as can be seen in the eyes of cats. He has no sense of
perseverance. It is, moreover, idiotic that, while he fills his diary with lamentation over his
stomach troubles, he does his best to present a brave face to the world; to grin and bear it.
      The other day his scholar friend, Professor Whatnot, paid a visit and advanced the theory
that it was at least arguable that every illness is the direct result of both ancestral and personal
malefaction. He seemed to have studied the matter pretty deeply for the sequence of his logic
was clear, consistent, and orderly. Altogether it was a fine theory. I am sorry to say that my
master has neither the brain nor the erudition to rebut such theories. However, perhaps
because he himself was actually suffering from stomach trouble, he felt obliged to make all
sorts of face-saving excuses. He irrelevantly retorted, “Your theory is interesting, but are you
aware that Carlyle was dyspeptic?” as if claiming that because Carlyle was dyspeptic his own
dyspepsia was an intellectual honor. His friend replied,
      “It does not follow that because Carlyle was a dyspeptic, all dyspeptics are Carlyles.” My
master, reprimanded, held his tongue, but the incident revealed his curious vanity. It’s all the
more amusing when one recalls that he would probably prefer not to be dyspeptic, for just this
morning he recorded in his diary an intention to take treatment by saké as from tonight. Now
that I’ve come to think of it, his inordinate consumption of rice-cakes this morning must have
been the effect of last night’s saké session with Coldmoon. I could have eaten those cakes
myself.
      Though I am a cat, I eat practically anything. Unlike Rickshaw Blacky, I lack the energy to
go off raiding fishshops up distant alleys. Further, my social status is such that I cannot expect
the luxury enjoyed by Tortoiseshell whose mistress teaches the idle rich to play on the two-
stringed harp. Therefore I don’t, as others can, indulge myself in likes and dislikes. I eat small
bits of bread left over by the children, and I lick the jam from bean-jam cakes. Pickles taste
awful, but to broaden my experience I once tried a couple of slices of pickled radish. It’s a
strange thing but once I’ve tried it, almost anything turns out edible. To say, “I don’t like that” or
“I don’t like this” is mere extravagant willfulness, and a cat that lives in a teacher’s house should
eschew such foolish remarks.
      According to my master, there was once a novelist whose name was Balzac and he lived in
France. He was an extremely extravagant man. I do not mean an extravagant eater but that,
being a novelist, he was extravagant in his writing. One day he was trying to find a suitable
name for a character in the novel he was writing, but, for whatever reason, could not think of a
name that pleased him. Just then one of his friends called by, and Balzac suggested they
should go out for a walk. This friend had, of course, no idea why, still less that Balzac was
determined to find the name he needed. Out on the streets, Balzac did nothing but stare at
shop signboards, but still he couldn’t find a suitable name. He marched on endlessly, while his
puzzled friend, still ignorant of the object of the expedition, tagged along behind him. Having
fruitlessly explored Paris from morning till evening, they were on their way home when Balzac
happened to notice a tailor’s signboard bearing the name “Marcus.” He clapped his hands.
“This is it,” he shouted. “It just has to be this. Marcus is a good name, but with a Z in front of
Marcus it becomes a perfect name. It has to be a Z. Z. Marcus is remarkably good. Names
that I invent are never good. They sound unnatural however cleverly constructed. But now, at
long, long last, I’ve got the name I like.” Balzac, extremely pleased with himself, was totally
oblivious to the inconvenience he had caused his friend. It would seem unduly troublesome that
one should have to spend a whole day trudging around Paris merely to find a name for a
character in a novel. Extravagance of such enormity acquires a certain splendor, but folk like
me, a cat kept by a clam-like introvert, cannot even envisage such inordinate behavior. That I
should not much care what, so long as it’s edible, I eat is probably an inevitable result of my
circumstances. Thus it was in no way as an expression of extravagance that I expressed just
now my feeling of wishing to eat a rice-cake. I simply thought that I’d better eat while the
chance offered, and I then remembered that the piece of rice-cake which my master had left in
his breakfast bowl was possibly still in the kitchen. So round to the kitchen I went.
      The rice-cake was stuck, just as I saw it this morning, at the bottom of the bowl and its
color was still as I remembered it. I must confess that I’ve never previously tasted rice-cake.
Yet, though I felt a shade uncertain, it looks quite good to eat. With a tentative front paw I rake
at the green vegetables adhering to the rice-cake. My claws, having touched the outer part of
the rice-cake, become sticky. I sniff at them and recognize the smell that can be smelt when
rice stuck at the bottom of a cooking-pot is transferred into the boiled-rice container. I look
around, wondering, “Shall I eat it, shall I not?” Fortunately, or unfortunately, there’s nobody
about. O-san, with a face that shows no change between year end and the spring, is playing
battledore and shuttlecock. The children in the inner room are singing something about a rabbit
and a tortoise. If I am to eat this New Year speciality, now’s the moment. If I miss this chance I
shall have to spend a whole, long year not knowing how a rice-cake tastes. At this point, though
a mere cat, I perceived a truth: that golden opportunity makes all animals venture to do even
those things they do not want to do. To tell the truth, I do not particularly want to eat the rice-
cake. In fact the more I examined the thing at the bottom of the bowl the more nervous I
became and the more keenly disinclined to eat it. If only O-san would open the kitchen door, or
if I could hear the children’s footsteps coming toward me, I would unhesitatingly abandon the
bowl; not only that, I would have put away all thought of rice-cakes for another year. But no one
comes. I’ve hesitated long enough. Still no one comes. I feel as if someone were hotly urging
me on, someone whispering, “Eat it, quickly!” I looked into the bowl and prayed that someone
would appear. But no one did. I shall have to eat the rice-cake after all. In the end, lowering the
entire weight of my body into the bottom of the bowl, I bit about an inch deep into a corner of
the rice-cake.
      Most things that I bite that hard come clean off in my mouth. But what a surprise! For I
found when I tried to reopen my jaw that it would not budge. I try once again to bite my way
free, but find I’m stuck. Too late I realize that the rice-cake is a fiend. When a man who has
fallen into a marsh struggles to escape, the more he thrashes about trying to extract his legs,
the deeper in he sinks. Just so, the harder I clamp my jaws, the more my mouth grows heavy
and my teeth immobilized. I can feel the resistance to my teeth, but that’s all. I cannot dispose
of it. Waverhouse, the aesthete, once described my master as an aliquant man and I must say
it’s rather a good description. This rice-cake too, like my master, is aliquant. It looked to me
that, however much I continued biting, nothing could ever result: the process could go on and on
eternally like the division of ten by three. In the middle of this anguish I found my second truth:
that all animals can tell by instinct what is or is not good for them. Although I have now
discovered two great truths, I remain unhappy by reason of the adherent rice-cake. My teeth
are being sucked into its body, and are becoming excruciatingly painful. Unless I can complete
my bite and run away quickly, O-san will be on me. The children seem to have stopped singing,
and I’m sure they’ll soon come running into the kitchen. In an extremity of anguish, I lashed
about with my tail, but to no effect. I made my ears stand up and then lie flat, but this didn’t
help either. Come to think of it, my ears and tail have nothing to do with the rice-cake. In short,
I had indulged in a waste of wagging, a waste of ear-erection, and a waste of ear-flattening.
So I stopped.
     At long last it dawned on me that the best thing to do is to force the rice-cake down by
using my two front paws. First I raised my right paw and stroked it around my mouth. Naturally,
this mere stroking brought no relief whatsoever. Next, I stretched out my left paw and with it
scraped quick circles around my mouth. These ineffectual passes failed to exorcize the fiend in
the rice-cake. Realizing that it was essential to proceed with patience, I scraped alternatively
with my right and left paws, but my teeth stayed stuck in the rice-cake. Growing impatient, I
now used both front paws simultaneously. Then, only then, I found to my amazement that I
could actually stand up on my hind legs. Somehow I feel un-catlike. But not caring whether I am
a cat or not, I scratch away like mad at my whole face in frenzied determination to keep on
scratching until the fiend in the rice-cake has been driven out. Since the movements of my front
paws are so vigorous I am in danger of losing my balance and falling down. To keep my
equilibrium I find myself marking time with my hind legs. I begin to tittup from one spot to
another, and I finish up prancing madly all over the kitchen. It gives me great pride to realize
that I can so dextrously maintain an upright position, and the revelation of a third great truth is
thus vouchsafed me: that in conditions of exceptional danger one can surpass one’s normal
level of achievement. This is the real meaning of Special Providence.
     Sustained by Special Providence, I am fighting for dear life against that demonic rice-cake
when I hear footsteps. Someone seems to be approaching. Thinking it would be fatal to be
caught in this predicament, I redouble my efforts and am positively running around the kitchen.
The footsteps come closer and closer. Alas, that Special Providence seems not to last forever.
In the end I am discovered by the children who loudly shout, “Why look! The cat’s been eating
rice-cakes and is dancing.” The first to hear their announcement was that O-san person.
Abandoning her shuttlecock and battledore, she flew in through the kitchen door crying,
“Gracious me!” Then the mistress, sedate in her formal silk kimono, deigns to remark, “What a
naughty cat.” And my master, drawn from his study by the general hubbub, shouts, “You fool!”
The children find me funniest, but by general agreement the whole household is having a good
old laugh. It is annoying, it is painful, it is impossible to stop dancing. Hell and damnation! When
at long last the laughter began to die down, the dear, little five-year-old piped up with an, “Oh
what a comical cat,” which had the effect of renewing the tide of their ebbing laughter. They
fairly split their sides. I have already heard and seen quite a lot of heartless human behavior,
but never before have I felt so bitterly critical of their conduct. Special Providence having
vanished into thin air, I was back in my customary position on all fours, finally at my wit’s end,
and, by reason of giddiness, cutting a quite ridiculous figure. My master seems to have felt it
would be perhaps a pity to let me die before his very eyes, for he said to O-san, “Help him get
rid of that rice-cake.” O-san looks at the mistress as if to say, “Why not make him go on
dancing?” The mistress would gladly see my minuet continued, but, since she would not go so
far as wanting me to dance myself to death, says nothing. My master turned somewhat sharply
to the servant and ordered, “Hurry it up, if you don’t help quickly the cat will be dead.” O-san,
with a vacant look on her face, as though she had been roughly wakened from some peculiarly
delicious dream, took a firm grip on the rice-cake and yanked it out of my mouth. I am not quite
as feeble-fanged as Coldmoon, but I really did think my entire front toothwork was about to
break off. The pain was indescribable. The teeth embedded in the rice-cake are being pitilessly
wrenched. You can’t imagine what it was like. It was then that the fourth enlightenment burst
upon me: that all comfort is achieved through hardship. When at last I came to myself and
looked around at a world restored to normality, all the members of the household had
disappeared into the inner room.
     Having made such a fool of myself, I feel quite unable to face such hostile critics as O-san.
It would, I think, unhinge my mind. To restore my mental tranquillity, I decided to visit
Tortoiseshell, so I left the kitchen and set off through the backyard to the house of the two-
stringed harp. Tortoiseshell is a celebrated beauty in our district. Though I am undoubtedly a
cat, I possess a wide general knowledge of the nature of compassion and am deeply sensitive
to affection, kind-heartedness, tenderness, and love. Merely to observe the bitterness in my
master’s face, just to be snubbed by O-san, leaves me out of sorts. At such times I visit this
fair, lady friend of mine and our conversation ranges over many things. Then, before I am
aware of it, I find myself refreshed. I forget my worries, hardships, everything. I feel as if
reborn. Female influence is indeed a most potent thing. Through a gap in the cedar-hedge, I
peer to see if she is anywhere about. Tortoiseshell, wearing a smart new collar in celebration of
the season, is sitting very neatly on her veranda. The rondure of her back is indescribably
beautiful. It is the most beautiful of all curved lines. The way her tail curves, the way she folds
her legs, the charmingly lazy shake of her ears—all these are quite beyond description. She
looks so warm sitting there so gracefully in the very sunniest spot. Her body holds an attitude of
utter stillness and correctness. And her fur, glossy as velvet that reflects the rays of spring,
seems suddenly to quiver although the air is still. For a while I stood, completely enraptured,
gazing at her. Then as I came to myself, I softly called, “Miss Tortoiseshell, Miss Tortoiseshell,”
and beckoned with my paw.
     “Why, Professor,” she greeted me as she stepped down from the veranda. A tiny bell
attached to her scarlet collar made little tinkling sounds. I say to myself, “Ah, it’s for the New
Year that she’s wearing a bell,” and, while I am still admiring its lively tinkle, find she has arrived
beside me. “A happy NewYear, Professor,” and she waves her tail to the left; for when cats
exchange greetings one first holds one’s tail upright like a pole, then twists it round to the left. In
our neighborhood it is only Tortoiseshell who calls me Professor. Now, I have already
mentioned that I have, as yet, no name; it is Tortoiseshell, and she alone, who pays me the
respect due to one that lives in a teacher’s house. Indeed, I am not altogether displeased to be
addressed as a Professor, and respond willingly to her apostrophe.
     “And a happy New Year to you,” I say. “How beautifully you’re done up!”
     “Yes, the mistress bought it for me at the end of last year. Isn’t it nice?” and she makes it
tinkle for me.
     “Yes indeed, it has a lovely sound. I’ve never seen such a wonderful thing in my life.”
     “No! Everyone’s using them,” and she tinkle-tinkles. “But isn’t it a lovely sound? I’m so
happy.” She tinkle-tinkle-tinkles continuously.
     “I can see your mistress loves you very dearly.” Comparing my lot with hers, I hinted at my
envy of a pampered life.
     Tortoiseshell is a simple creature. “Yes,” she says, “that’s true; she treats me as if I were
her own child.” And she laughs innocently. It is not true that cats never laugh. Human beings are
mistaken in their belief that only they are capable of laughter. When I laugh my nostrils grow
triangular and my Adam’s apple trembles. No wonder human beings fail to understand it.
     “What is your master really like?”
     “My master? That sounds strange. Mine is a mistress. A mistress of the two stringed harp.”
     “I know that. But what is her background? I imagine she’s a person of high birth?”
     “Ah, yes.”
     A small Princess-pine
     While waiting for you. . .
     Beyond the sliding paper-door the mistress begins to play on her two-stringed harp.
     “Isn’t that a splendid voice?” Tortoiseshell is proud of it.
     “It seems extremely good, but I don’t understand what she’s singing. What’s the name of
the piece?”
     “That? Oh, it’s called something or other. The mistress is especially fond of it. D’you know,
she’s actually sixty-two? But in excellent condition, don’t you think?”
     I suppose one has to admit that she’s in excellent condition if she’s still alive at sixty-two.
So I answered, “Yes.” I thought to myself that I’d given a silly answer, but I could do no other
since I couldn’t think of anything brighter to say.
     “You may not think so, but she used to be a person of high standing.
     She always tells me so.”
     “What was she originally?”
     “I understand that she’s the thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife’s private-secretary’s younger
sister’s husband’s mother’s nephew’s daughter.”
     “What?”
     “The thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife’s private-secretary’s younger sister’s. . .”
     “Ah! But, please, not quite so fast. The thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife’s younger sister’s
private-secretary’s . . .”
     “No, no, no. The thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife’s private-secretary’s younger sister’s. .
.”
     “The thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife’s. . .”
     “Right.”
     “Private-secretary’s. Right?”
     “Right.”
     “Husband’s. . .”
     “No, younger sister’s husband’s.”
     “Of course. How could I? Younger sister’s husband’s. . .”
     “Mother’s nephew’s daughter. There you are.”
     “Mother’s nephew’s daughter?”
     “Yes, you’ve got it.”
     “Not really. It’s so terribly involved that I still can’t get the hang of it.
     What exactly is her relation to the thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife?”
     “Oh, but you are so stupid! I’ve just been telling you what she is.
     She’s the thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife’s private-secretary’s younger sister’s husband’s
mother’s. . .”
     “That much I’ve followed, but. . .”
     “Then, you’ve got it, haven’t you?”
     “Yes.” I had to give in. There are times for little white lies.
     Beyond the sliding paper-door the sound of the two-stringed harp came to a sudden stop
and the mistress’ voice called, “Tortoiseshell, Tortoiseshell, your lunch is ready.” Tortoiseshell
looked happy and remarked, “There, she’s calling, so I must go home. I hope you’ll forgive
me?” What would be the good of my saying that I mind? “Come and see me again,” she said;
and she ran off through the garden tinkling her bell. But suddenly she turned and came back to
ask me anxiously, “You’re looking far from well. Is anything wrong?” I couldn’t very well tell her
that I’d eaten a rice-cake and gone dancing; so, “No,” I said, “nothing in particular. I did some
weighty thinking, which brought on something of a headache. Indeed I called today because I
fancied that just to talk with you would help me to feel better.”
     “Really? Well, take good care of yourself. Good-bye now.” She seemed a tiny bit sorry to
leave me, which has completely restored me to the liveliness I’d felt before the rice-cake bit
me. I now felt wonderful and decided to go home through that tea-plantation where one could
have the pleasure of treading down lumps of half-melted frost. I put my face through the broken
bamboo hedge, and there was Rickshaw Blacky, back again on the dry chrysanthemums,
yawning his spine into a high, black arch. Nowadays I’m no longer scared of Blacky, but, since
any conversation with him involves the risk of trouble, I endeavor to pass, cutting him off. But
it’s not in Blacky’s nature to contain his feelings if he believes himself looked down upon. “Hey
you, Mr. No-name. You’re very stuck-up these days, now aren’t you? You may be living in a
teacher’s house, but don’t go giving yourself such airs. And stop, I warn you, trying to make a
fool of me.” Blacky doesn’t seem to know that I am now a celebrity. I wish I could explain the
situation to him, but, since he’s not the kind who can understand such things, I decide simply to
offer him the briefest of greetings and then to take my leave as soon as I decently can.
     “A happy New Year, Mr. Blacky. You do look well, as usual.” And I lift up my tail and twist it
to the left. Blacky, keeping his tail straight up, refused to return my salutation.
     “What! Happy? If the New Year’s happy, then you should be out of your tiny mind the whole
year round. Now push off sharp, you back-end of a bellows.”
     That turn of phrase about the back-end of a bellows sounds distinctly derogatory, but its
semantic content happened to escape me. “What,” I enquired, “do you mean by the back-end
of a bellows?”
     “You’re being sworn at and you stand there asking its meaning. I give up! I really do! You
really are a New Year’s nit.”
     A New Year’s nit sounds somewhat poetic, but its meaning is even more obscure than that
bit about the bellows. I would have liked to ask the meaning for my future reference, but, as it
was obvious I’d get no clear answer, I just stood facing him without a word. I was actually
feeling rather awkward, but just then the wife of Blacky’s master suddenly screamed out,
“Where in hell is that cut of salmon I left here on the shelf? My God, I do declare that hellcat’s
been here and snitched it once again! That’s the nastiest cat I’ve ever seen. See what he’ll get
when he comes back!” Her raucous voice unceremoniously shakes the mild air of the season,
vulgarizing its natural peacefulness. Blacky puts on an impudent look as if to say, “If you want
to scream your head off, scream away,” and he jerked his square chin forward at me as if to
say, “Did you hear that hullaballoo?” Up to this point I’ve been too busy talking to Blacky to
notice or think about anything else; but now, glancing down, I see between his legs a mud-
covered bone from the cheapest cut of salmon.
     “So you’ve been at it again!” Forgetting our recent exchanges, I offered Blacky my usual
flattering exclamation. But it was not enough to restore him to good humor.
     “Been at it! What the hell d’you mean, you saucy blockhead? And what do you mean by
saying ‘again’ when this is nothing but a skinny slice of the cheapest fish? Don’t you know who I
am! I’m Rickshaw Blacky, damn you.” And, having no shirtsleeves to roll up, he lifts an
aggressive right front-paw as high as his shoulder.
     “I’ve always known you were Mr. Rickshaw Blacky.”
     “If you knew, why the hell did you say I’d been at it again? Answer me!” And he blows out
over me great gusts of oven breath. Were we humans, I would be shaken by the collar of my
coat. I am somewhat taken aback and am indeed wondering how to get out of the situation,
when that woman’s fearful voice is heard again.
     “Hey! Mr. Westbrook. You there, Westbrook, can you hear me? Listen, I got something to
say. Bring me a pound of beef, and quick. O.K.? Understand? Beef that isn’t tough. A pound of
it. See?” Her beef-demanding tones shatter the peace of the whole neighborhood.
     “It’s only once a year she orders beef and that’s why she shouts so loud. She wants the
entire neighborhood to know about her marvellous pound of beef. What can one do with a
woman like that!” asked Blacky jeeringly as he stretched all four of his legs. As I can find
nothing to say in reply, I keep silent and watch.
     “A miserable pound just simply will not do. But I reckon it can’t be helped. Hang on to that
beef. I’ll have it later.” Blacky communes with himself as though the beef had been ordered
specially for him.
     “This time you’re in for a real treat. That’s wonderful!” With these words I’d hoped to pack
him off to his home.
     But Blacky snarled, “That’s nothing to do with you. Just shut your big mouth, you!” and
using his strong hind-legs, he suddenly scrabbles up a torrent of fallen icicles which thuds down
on my head. I was taken completely aback, and, while I was still busy shaking the muddy
debris off my body, Blacky slid off through the hedge and disappeared. Presumably to possess
himself of Westbrook’s beef.
     When I get home I find the place unusually springlike and even the master is laughing gaily.
Wondering why, I hopped onto the veranda, and, as I padded to sit beside the master, noticed
an unfamiliar guest. His hair is parted neatly and he wears a crested cotton surcoat and a duck-
cloth hakama. He looks like a student and, at that, an extremely serious one. Lying on the
corner of my master’s small hand-warming brazier, right beside the lacquer cigarette-box,
there’s a visiting card on which is written, “To introduce Mr. Beauchamp Blowlamp: from
Coldmoon.”
     Which tells me both the name of this guest and the fact that he’s a friend of Coldmoon. The
conversation going on between host and guest sounds enigmatic because I missed the start of
it. But I gather that it has something to do with Waverhouse, the aesthete whom I have had
previous occasion to mention.
     “And he urged me to come along with him because it would involve an ingenious idea, he
said.” The guest is talking calmly.
     “Do you mean there was some ingenious idea involved in lunching at aWestern style
restaurant?” My master pours more tea for the guest and pushes the cup toward him.
      “Well, at the time I did not understand what this ingenious idea could be, but, since it was
his idea, I thought it bound to be something interesting and. . .”
      “So you accompanied him. I see.”
      “Yes, but I got a surprise.”
      The master, looking as if to say, “I told you so,” gives me a whack on the head. Which hurts
a little. “I expect it proved somewhat farcical. He’s rather that way inclined.” Clearly, he has
suddenly remembered that business with Andrea del Sarto.
      “Ah yes? Well, as he suggested we would be eating something special. . .”
      “What did you have?”
      “First of all, while studying the menu, he gave me all sorts of information about food.”
      “Before ordering any?”
      “Yes.”
      “And then?”
      “And then, turning to a waiter, he said, ‘There doesn’t seem to be anything special on the
card.’ The waiter, not to be outdone, suggested roast duck or veal chops. Whereupon
Waverhouse remarked quite sharply that we hadn’t come a very considerable distance just for
common or garden fare. The waiter, who didn’t understand the significance of common or
garden, looked puzzled and said nothing.”
      “So I would imagine.”
      “Then, turning to me, Waverhouse observed that in France or in England one can obtain any
amount of dishes cooked à la Tenmei or à la Manyō but that in Japan, wherever you go, the
food is all so stereotyped that one doesn’t even feel tempted to enter a restaurant of the so-
called Western style. And so on and so on. He was in tremendous form. But has he ever been
abroad?”
      “Waverhouse abroad? Of course not. He’s got the money and the time. If he wanted to, he
could go off anytime. He probably just converted his future intention to travel into the past tense
of widely traveled experience as a sort of joke.” The master flatters himself that he has said
something witty and laughs invitingly. His guest looks largely unimpressed.
      “I see. I wondered when he’d been abroad. I took everything he said quite seriously.
Besides, he described such things as snail soup and stewed frogs as though he’d really seen
them with his own two eyes.”
      “He must have heard about them from someone. He’s adept at such terminological
inexactitudes.”
      “So it would seem,” and Beauchamp stares down at the narcissus in a vase. He seems a
little disappointed.
      “So, that then was his ingenious idea, I take it?” asks the master still in quest of certainties.
      “No, that was only the beginning. The main part’s still to come.”
      “Ah!”The master utters an interjection mingled with curiosity.
      “Having finished his dissertation on matters gastronomical and European, he proposed
‘since it’s quite impossible to obtain snails or frogs, however much we may desire them, let’s at
least have moat-bells.
      What do you say?’ And without really giving the matter any thought at all, I answered, ‘Yes,
that would be fine.’”
      “Moat-bells sound a little odd.”
      “Yes, very odd, but because Waverhouse was speaking so seriously, I didn’t then notice the
oddity.” He seems to be apologizing to my master for his carelessness.
     “What happened next?” asks my master quite indifferently and without any sign of
sympathetic response to his guest’s implied apology.
     “Well, then he told the waiter to bring moat-bells for two. The waiter said,‘Do you mean
meatballs, sir?’ but Waverhouse, assuming an ever more serious expression, corrected him with
gravity. ‘No, not meatballs, moat-bells.’”
     “Really? But is there any such dish as moat-bells?”
     “Well I thought it sounded somewhat strange, but as Waverhouse was so calmly sure and
is so great an authority on all things Occidental—remember it was then my firm belief that he
was widely traveled—I too joined in and explained to the waiter,‘Moat-bells, my good man,
moat-bells.’”
     “What did the waiter do?”
     “The waiter—it’s really rather funny now one comes to think back on it—looked thoughtful
for a while and then said, ‘I’m terribly sorry sir, but today, unfortunately, we have no moat-bells.
Though should you care for meatballs we could serve you, sir, immediately.’ Waverhouse
thereupon looked extremely put out and said, ‘So we’ve come all this long way for nothing.
Couldn’t you really manage moat-bells? Please do see what can be done,’ and he slipped a
small tip to the waiter. The waiter said he would ask the cook again and went off into the
kitchen.”
     “He must have had his mind dead set on eating moat-bells.”
     “After a brief interval the waiter returned to say that if moat-bells were ordered specially
they could be provided, but that it would take a long time. Waverhouse was quite composed.
He said, ‘It’s the New Year and we are in no kind of hurry. So let’s wait for it?’ He drew a cigar
from the inside of his Western suit and lighted up in the most leisurely manner. I felt called upon
to match his cool composure so, taking the Japan News from my kimono pocket, I started
reading it. The waiter retired for further consultations.”
     “What a business!” My master leans forward, showing quite as much enthusiasm as he
does when reading war news in the dailies.
     “The waiter reemerged with apologies and the confession that, of late, the ingredients of
moat-bells were in such short supply that one could not get them at Kameya’s nor even down at
No. 15 in Yokohama.
     He expressed regret, but it seemed certain that the material for moat-bells would not be
back in stock for some considerable time.
     Waverhouse then turned to me and repeated, over and over again,
     ‘What a pity, and we came especially for that dish.’ I felt that I had to say something, so I
joined him in saying,‘Yes, it’s a terrible shame! Really, a great, great pity!’”
     “Quite so,” agrees my master, though I myself don’t follow his reasoning.
     “These observations must have made the waiter feel quite sorry, for he said,‘When, one of
these days, we do have the necessary ingredients, we’d be happy if you would come, sir, and
sample our fare.’ But when Waverhouse proceeded to ask him what ingredients the restaurant
did use, the waiter just laughed and gave no answer. Waverhouse then pressingly enquired if
the key-ingredient happened to be Tochian (who, as you know, is a haiku poet of the Nihon
School); and d’you know, the waiter answered,‘Yes, it is, sir, and that is precisely why none is
currently available even in Yokohama. I am indeed,’ he added, ‘most regretful, sir.’”
     “Ha-ha-ha! So that’s the point of the story? How very funny!” and the master, quite unlike
his usual self, roars with laughter. His knees shake so much that I nearly tumble off. Paying no
regard to my predicament, the master laughs and laughs. He seems suddenly deeply pleased
to realize that he is not alone in being gulled by Andrea del Sarto.
     “And then, as soon as we were out in the street, he said ‘You see, we’ve done well. That
ploy about the moat-bells was really rather good, wasn’t it?’ and he looked as pleased as
punch. I let it be known that I was lost in admiration, and so we parted. However, since by then
it was well past the lunch-hour, I was nearly starving.”
     “That must have been very trying for you.” My master shows, for the first time, a sympathy
to which I have no objection. For a while there was a pause in the conversation and my purring
could be heard by host and guest.
     Mr. Beauchamp drains his cup of tea, now quite cold, in one quick gulp and with some
formality remarks, “As a matter-of-fact I’ve come today to ask a favor from you.”
     “Yes? And what can I do for you?” My master, too, assumes a formal face.
     “As you know, I am a devotee of literature and art. . .”
     “That’s a good thing,” replies my master quite encouragingly.
     “Since a little while back, I and a few like-minded friends have got together and organized a
reading group. The idea is to meet once a month for the purpose of continued studying in this
field. In fact, we’ve already had the first meeting at the end of last year.”
     “May I ask you a question? When you say, like that, a reading group, it suggests that you
engage in reading poetry and prose in a singsong tone. But in what sort of manner do you, in
fact, proceed?”
     “Well, we are beginning with ancient works but we intend to consider the works of our
fellow members.”
     “When you speak of ancient works, do you mean something like Po Chu-i’s Lute Song?”
     “No.”
     “Perhaps things like Buson’s mixture of haiku and Chinese verse?”
     “No.”
     “What kinds of thing do you then do?”
     “The other day, we did one of Chikamatsu’s lovers’ suicides.”
     “Chikamatsu? You mean the Chikamatsu who wrote jōruri plays?”
     There are not two Chikamatsus. When one says Chikamatsu, one does indeed mean
Chikamatsu the playwright and could mean nobody else. I thought my master really stupid to
ask so fool a question. However, oblivious to my natural reactions, he gently strokes my head. I
calmly let him go on stroking me, justifying my compliance with the reflection that so small a
weakness is permissible when there are those in the world who admit to thinking themselves
under loving observation by persons who merely happen to be cross-eyed.
     Beauchamp answers, “Yes,” and tries to read the reaction on my master’s face.
     “Then is it one person who reads or do you allot parts among you?”
     “We allot parts and each reads out the appropriate dialogue. The idea is to empathize with
the characters in the play and, above all, to bring out their individual personalities. We do
gestures as well. The main thing is to catch the essential character of the era of the play.
Accordingly, the lines are read out as if spoken by each character, which may perhaps be a
young lady or possibly an errand-boy.”
     “In that case it must be like a play.”
     “Yes, almost the only things missing are the costumes and the scenery.”
      “May I ask if your reading was a success?”
      “For a first attempt, I think one might claim that it was, if anything, a success.”
      “And which lovers’ suicide play did you perform on the last occasion?”
      “We did a scene in which a boatman takes a fare to the red light quarter of Yoshiwara.”
      “You certainly picked on a most irregular incident, didn’t you?” My master, being a teacher,
tilts his head a little sideways as if regarding something slightly doubtful. The cigarette smoke
drifting from his nose passes up by his ear and along the side of his head.
      “No, it isn’t that irregular. The characters are a passenger, a boatman, a high-class
prostitute, a serving-girl, an ancient crone of a brothel-attendant, and, of course, a geisha-
registrar. But that’s all.” Beauchamp seems utterly unperturbed. My master, on hearing the
words “a high-class prostitute,” winces slightly but probably only because he’s not well up in the
meanings of such technical terms as nakai, yarite, and kemban.
      He seeks to clear the ground with a question. “Does not nakai signify something like a
maid-servant in a brothel?”
      “Though I have not yet given the matter my full attention, I believe that nakai signifies a
serving-girl in a teahouse and that yarite is some sort of an assistant in the women’s quarters.”
Although Beauchamp recently claimed that his group seeks to impersonate the actual voices of
the characters in the plays, he does not seem to have fully grasped the real nature of yarite
and nakai.
      “I see, nakai belong to a teahouse while yarite live in a brothel. Next, are kemban human
beings or is it the name of a place? If human, are they men or women?”
      “Kemban, I rather think, is a male human being.”
      “What is his function?”
      “I’ve not yet studied that far. But I’ll make inquiries, one of these days.”
      Thinking, in the light of these revelations, that the play-readings must be affairs
extraordinarily ill-conducted, I glance up at my master’s face.
      Surprisingly, I find him looking serious. “Apart from yourself, who were the other readers
taking part?”
      “A wide variety of people. Mr. K, a Bachelor of Law, played the high-class prostitute, but
his delivery of that woman’s sugary dialogue through his very male mustache did, I confess,
create a slightly queer impression. And then there was a scene in which this oiran was seized
with spasms. . .”
      “Do your readers extend their reading activities to the simulation of spasms?” asked my
master anxiously.
      “Yes indeed; for expression is, after all, important.” Beauchamp clearly considers himself a
literary artist à l’outrance.
      “Did he manage to have his spasms nicely?” My master has made a witty remark.
      “The spasms were perhaps the only thing beyond our capability at such a first endeavor.”
Beauchamp, too, is capable of wit.
      “By the way,” asks my master, “what part did you take?”
      “I was the boatman.”
      “Really? You, the boatman!” My master’s tone was such as to suggest that, if Beauchamp
could be a boatman, he himself could be a geisha-registrar. Switching his tone to one of simple
candor, he then asks: “Was the role of the boatman too much for you?”
      Beauchamp does not seem particularly offended. Maintaining the same calm voice, he
replies, “As a matter of fact, it was because of this boatman that our precious gathering,
though it went up like a rocket, came down like a stick. It so happened that four or five girl
students are living in the boarding house next door to our meeting hall. I don’t know how, but
they found out when our reading was to take place. Anyway, it appears that they came and
listened to us under the window of the hall.
     I was doing the boatman’s voice, and, just when I had warmed up nicely and was really
getting into the swing of it—perhaps my gestures were a little over-exaggerated—the girl
students, all of whom had managed to control their feelings up to that point, thereupon burst out
into simultaneous cachinnations. I was of course surprised, and I was of course embarrassed:
indeed, thus dampened, I could not find it in me to continue. So our meeting came to an end.”
     If this were considered a success, even for a first meeting, what would failure have been
like? I could not help laughing. Involuntarily, my Adam’s apple made a rumbling noise. My
master, who likes what he takes to be purring, strokes my head ever more and more gently. I’m
thankful to be loved just because I laugh at someone, but at the same time I feel a bit uneasy.
     “What very bad luck!” My master offers condolences despite the fact that we are still in the
congratulatory season of the New Year.
     “As for our second meeting, we intend to make a great advance and manage things in the
grand style. That, in fact, is the very reason for my call today: we’d like you to join our group
and help us.”
     “I can’t possibly have spasms.” My negative-minded master is already poised to refuse.
     “No, you don’t have to have spasms or anything like that. Here’s a list of the patron
members.” So saying, Beauchamp very carefully produced a small notebook from a purple-
colour carrying-wrapper. He opened the notebook and placed it in front of my master’s knees.
“Will you please sign and make your seal-mark here?” I see that the book contains the names
of distinguished Doctors of Literature and Bachelors of Arts of this present day, all neatly
mustered in full force.
     “Well, I wouldn’t say I object to becoming a supporter, but what sort of obligations would I
have to meet?” My oyster-like master displays his apprehensions. . .
     “There’s hardly any obligation. We ask nothing from you except a signature expressing your
approval.”
     “Well, in that case, I’ll join.” As he realizes that there is no real obligation involved, he
suddenly becomes lighthearted. His face assumes the expression of one who would sign even a
secret commitment to engage in rebellion, provided it was clear that the signature carried no
binding obligation. Besides, it is understandable that he should assent so eagerly: for to be
included, even by name only, among so many names of celebrated scholars is a supreme honor
for one who has never before had such an opportunity. “Excuse me,” and my master goes off
to the study to fetch his seal. I am tipped to fall unceremoniously onto the matting.
     Beauchamp helps himself to a slice of sponge cake from the cake-bowl and crams it into
his mouth. For a while he seems to be in pain, mumbling. Just for a second I am reminded of
my morning experience with the rice-cake. My master reappears with his seal just as the
sponge cake settles down in Beauchamp’s bowels. My master does not seem to notice that a
piece of sponge cake is missing from the cake-bowl. If he does, I shall be the first to be
suspected.
     Mr. Beauchamp having taken his departure, my master reenters the study where he finds
on his desk a letter from friend Waverhouse.
    “I wish you a very happy New Year. . .”
    My master considers the letter to have started with an unusual seriousness. Letters from
Waverhouse are seldom serious. The other day, for instance, he wrote: “Of late, as I am not in
love with any woman, I receive no love letters from anywhere. As I am more or less alive,
please set your mind at ease.” Compared with which, this New Year’s letter is exceptionally
matter-of-fact:



    I would like to come and see you, but I am so very extremely busy every day because,
    contrary to your negativism, I am planning to greet this New Year, a year unprecedented
    in all history, with as positive an attitude as is possible. Hoping you will understand. . .



    My master quite understands, thinking that Waverhouse, being Waverhouse, must be busy
having fun during the New Year season.



    Yesterday, finding a minute to spare, I sought to treat Mr. Beauchamp to a dish of moat-
    bells. Unfortunately, due to a shortage of their ingredients, I could not carry out my
    intention. It was most regrettable. . .



    My master smiles, thinking that the letter is falling more into the usual pattern.



    Tomorrow there will be a card party at a certain Baron’s house; the day after tomorrow a
    New Year’s banquet at the Society of Aesthetes; and the day after that, a welcoming
    party for Professor Toribe; and on the day thereafter. . .



    My master, finding it rather a bore, skips a few lines.



    So you see, because of these incessant parties— nō song parties, haiku parties, tanka
    parties, even parties for New Style Poetry, and so on and so on, I am perpetually
    occupied for quite some time. And that is why I am obliged to send you this New Year’s
    letter instead of calling on you in person. I pray you will forgive me. . .



    “Of course you do not have to call on me.” My master voices his answer to the letter.
    Next time that you are kind enough to visit me, I would like you to stay and dine. Though
    there is no special delicacy in my poor larder, at least I hope to be able to offer you
    some moat-bells, and I am indeed looking forward to that pleasure. . .



     “He’s still brandishing his moat-bells,” muttered my master, who, thinking the invitation an
insult, begins to feel indignant.



    However, because the ingredients necessary for the preparation of moat-bells are
    currently in rather short supply, it may not be possible to arrange it. In which case, I will
    offer you some peacocks’ tongues. . .



    “Aha! So he’s got two strings to his bow,” thinks my master and cannot resist reading the
rest of the letter.



    As you know, the tongue meat per peacock amounts to less than half the bulk of the
    small finger. Therefore, in order to satisfy your gluttonous stomach. . .



    “What a pack of lies,” remarks my master in a tone of resignation.



    I think one needs to catch at least twenty or thirty peacocks. However, though one sees
    an occasional peacock, maybe two, at the zoo or at the Asakusa Amusement Center,
    there are none to be found at my poulterer’s, which is occasioning me pain, great pain. . .



    “You’re having that pain of your own free will.” My master shows no evidence of gratitude.



    The dish of peacocks’ tongues was once extremely fashionable in Rome when the Roman
    Empire was in the full pride of its prosperity. How I have always secretly coveted after
    peacocks’ tongues, that acme of gastronomical luxury and elegance, you may well
    imagine. . .
   “I may well imagine, may I? How ridiculous.” My master is extremely cold.



   From that time forward until about the sixteenth century, peacock was an indispensable
   delicacy at all banquets. If my memory serves me, when the Earl of Leicester invited
   Queen Elizabeth to Kenilworth, peacocks’ tongues were on the menu. And in one of
   Rembrandt’s banquet scenes, a peacock is clearly to be seen, lying in its pride upon the
   table. . .



   My master grumbles that if Waverhouse can find time to compose a history of the eating of
peacocks, he cannot really be so busy.



   Anyway, if I go on eating good food as I have been doing recently, I will doubtless end up
   one of these days with a stomach weak as yours. . .



   “‘Like yours’ is quite unnecessary. He has no need to establish me as the prototypical
dyspeptic,” grumbles my master.



   According to historians, the Romans held two or three banquets every day. But the
   consumption of so much good food, while sitting at a large table two or three times a
   day, must produce in any man, however sturdy his stomach, disorders in the digestive
   functions. Thus nature has, like you. . .



   “‘Like you,’ again, what impudence!”



   But they, who studied long and hard simultaneously to enjoy both luxury and exuberant
   health, considered it vital not only to devour disproportionately large quantities of
   delicacies, but also to maintain the bowels in full working order. They accordingly devised
   a secret formula. . .



   “Really?” My master suddenly becomes enthusiastic.
   They invariably took a post-prandial bath. After the bath, utilizing methods whose secret
   has long been lost, they proceeded to vomit up everything they had swallowed before the
   bath. Thus were the insides of their stomachs kept scrupulously clean. Having so
   cleansed their stomachs, they would sit down again at the table and there savor to the
   uttermost the delicacies of their choice. Then they took a bath again and vomited once
   more. In this way, though they gorged on their favorite dishes to their hearts’ content,
   none of their internal organs suffered the least damage. In my humble opinion, this was
   indeed a case of having one’s cake and eating it.



    “They certainly seem to have killed two or more birds with one stone.” My master’s
expression is one of envy.



   Today, this twentieth century, quite apart from the heavy traffic and the increased number
   of banquets, when our nation is in the second year of a war against Russia, is indeed
   eventful. I, consequently, firmly believe that the time has come for us, the people of this
   victorious country, to bend our minds to study of the truly Roman art of bathing and
   vomiting. Otherwise, I am afraid that even the precious people of this mighty nation will,
   in the very near future, become, like you, dyspeptic. . .



   “What, again like me? An annoying fellow,” thinks my master.



   Now suppose that we, who are familiar with all things Occidental, by study of ancient
   history and legend contrive to discover the secret formula that has long been lost; then to
   make use of it now in our Meiji Era would be an act of virtue. It would nip potential
   misfortune in the bud, and, moreover, it would justify my own everyday life which has
   been one of constant indulgence in pleasure.



   My master thinks all this a trifle odd.



   Accordingly, I have now, for some time, been digging into the relevant works of Gibbon,
   Mommsen, and Goldwin Smith, but I am extremely sorry to report that, so far, I have
   gained not even the slightest clue to the secret. However, as you know, I am a man who,
   once set upon a course, will not abandon it until my object is achieved. Therefore my
   belief is that a rediscovery of the vomiting method is not far off. I will let you know when it
   happens. Incidentally, I would prefer postponing that feast of moat-bells and peacocks’
   tongues, which I’ve mentioned above, until the discovery has actually been made. Which
    would not only be convenient to me, but also to you who suffer from a weak stomach.



     “So, he’s been pulling my leg all along. The style of writing was so sober that I have read it
all, and took the whole thing seriously.
     Waverhouse must indeed be a man of leisure to play such a practical joke on me,” said my
master through his laughter.
     Several days then passed without any particular event. Thinking it too boring to spend one’s
time just watching the narcissus in a white vase gradually wither, and the slow blossoming of a
branch of the blue-stemmed plum in another vase, I have gone around twice to look for
Tortoiseshell, but both times unsuccessfully. On the first occasion I thought she was just out,
but on my second visit I learnt that she was ill.
     Hiding myself behind the aspidistra beside a wash-basin, I heard the following conversation
which took place between the mistress and her maid on the other side of the sliding paper-
door.
     “Is Tortoiseshell taking her meal?”
     “No, madam, she’s eaten nothing this morning. I’ve let her sleep on the quilt of the foot-
warmer, well wrapped up.” It does not sound as if they spoke about a cat. Tortoiseshell is
being treated as if she were a human.
     As I compare this situation with my own lot, I feel a little envious but at the same time I am
not displeased that my beloved cat should be treated with such kindness.
     “That’s bad. If she doesn’t eat she will only get weaker.”
     “Yes indeed, madam. Even me, if I don’t eat for a whole day, I couldn’t work at all the next
day.”
     The maid answers as though she recognized the cat as an animal superior to herself.
Indeed, in this particular household the cat may well be more important than the maid.
     “Have you taken her to see a doctor?”
     “Yes, and the doctor was really strange. When I went into his consulting room carrying
Tortoiseshell in my arms, he asked me if I’d caught a cold and tried to take my pulse. I said ‘No,
Doctor, it is not I who am the patient, this is the patient,’ and I placed Tortoiseshell on my
knees.
     The doctor grinned and said he had no knowledge of the sicknesses of cats, and that if I
just left it, perhaps it would get better. Isn’t he too terrible? I was so angry that I told him,‘Then,
please don’t bother to examine her, she happens to be our precious cat.’ And I snuggled
Tortoiseshell back into the breast of my kimono and came straight home.”
     “Truly so.”
     “Truly so” is one of those elegant expressions that one would never hear in my house. One
has to be the thirteenth Shogun’s widowed wife’s somebody’s something to be able to use such
a phrase. I was much impressed by its refinement.
     “She seems to be sniffling. . .”
     “Yes, I’m sure she’s got a cold and a sore throat; whenever one has a cold, one suffers
from an honorable cough.”
     As might be expected from the maid of the thirteenth Shogun’s somebody’s something,
she’s quick with honorifics.
     “Besides, recently, there’s a thing they call consumption. . .”
     “Indeed these days one cannot be too careful. What with the increase in all these new
diseases like tuberculosis and the black plague.”
     “Things that did not exist in the days of the Shogunate are all no good to anyone. So you be
careful too!”
     “Is that so, madam?”
     The maid is much moved.
     “I don’t see how she could have caught a cold, she hardly ever went out. . .”
     “No, but you see she’s recently acquired a bad friend.”
     The maid is as highly elated as if she were telling a State secret.
     “A bad friend?”
     “Yes, that tatty-looking tom at the teacher’s house in the main street.”
     “D’you mean that teacher who makes rude noises every morning?”
     “Yes, the one who makes the sounds like a goose being strangled every time he washes
his face.”
     The sound of a goose being strangled is a clever description. Every morning when my
master gargles in the bathroom he has an odd habit of making a strange, unceremonious noise
by tapping his throat with his toothbrush. When he is in a bad temper he croaks with a
vengeance; when he is in a good temper, he gets so pepped up that he croaks even more
vigorously. In short, whether he is in a good or a bad temper, he croaks continually and
vigorously. According to his wife, until they moved to this house he never had the habit; but he’s
done it every day since the day he first happened to do it. It is rather a trying habit. We cats
cannot even imagine why he should persist in such behavior. Well, let that pass. But what a
scathing remark that was about “a tatty-looking tom.” I continue to eavesdrop.
     “What good can he do making that noise! Under the Shogunate even a lackey or a sandal-
carrier knew how to behave; and in a residential quarter there was no one who washed his face
in such a manner.”
     “I’m sure there wasn’t, madam.”
     That maid is all too easily influenced, and she uses “madam” far too often.
     “With a master like that what’s to be expected from his cat? It can only be a stray. If he
comes round here again, beat him.”
     “Most certainly I’ll beat him. It must be all his fault that Tortoiseshell’s so poorly. I’ll take it
out on him, that I will.”
     How false these accusations laid against me! But judging it rash to approach too closely, I
came home without seeing Tortoiseshell.
     When I return, my master is in the study meditating in the middle of writing something. If I
told him what they say about him in the house of the two-stringed harp, he would be very angry;
but, as the saying goes, ignorance is bliss. There he sits, posing like a sacred poet, groaning.
     Just then,Waverhouse, who has expressly stated in his New Year letter that he would be
too busy to call for some long time, dropped in.
     “Are you composing a new-style poem or something? Show it to me if it’s interesting.”
     “I considered it rather impressive prose, so I thought I’d translate it,” answers my master
somewhat reluctantly.
     “Prose? Whose prose?”
     “Don’t know whose.”
     “I see, an anonymous author. Among anonymous works, there are indeed some extremely
good ones. They are not to be slighted. Where did you find it?”
     “The Second Reader, ” answers my master with imperturbable calmness.
     “The Second Reader? What’s this got to do with the Second Reader?”
     “The connection is that the beautifully written article which I’m now translating appears in
the Second Reader.”
     “Stop talking rubbish. I suppose this is your idea of a last minute squaring of accounts for
the peacocks’ tongues?”
     “I’m not a braggart like you,” says my master and twists his mustache. He is perfectly
composed.
     “Once when someone asked Sanyo whether he’d lately seen any fine pieces of prose, that
celebrated scholar of the Chinese classics produced a dunning letter from a packhorse man
and said,‘This is easily the finest piece of prose that has recently come to my attention.’ Which
implies that your eye for the beautiful might, contrary to one’s expectations, actually be
accurate. Read your piece aloud. I’ll review it for you,” says Waverhouse as if he were the
originator of all aesthetic theories and practice. My master starts to read in the voice of a Zen
priest, reading that injunction left by the Most Reverend Priest Daitō. “‘Giant Gravitation,’” he
intoned.
     “What on earth is giant gravitation?”
     “‘Giant Gravitation’ is the title.”
     “An odd title. I don’t quite understand.”
     “The idea is that there’s a giant whose name is Gravitation.”
     “A somewhat unreasonable idea but, since it’s a title, I’ll let that pass.
     All right, carry on with the text. You have a good voice. Which makes it rather interesting.”
     “Right, but no more interruptions.” My master, having laid down his prior conditions, begins
to read again.



    Kate looks out of the window. Children are playing ball. They throw the ball high up in the
    sky. The ball rises up and up. After a while the ball comes down. They throw it high
    again: twice, three times. Every time they throw it up, the ball comes down. Kate asks
    why it comes down instead of rising up and up. “It is because a giant lives in the earth,”
    replies her mother. “He is the Giant Gravitation. He is strong. He pulls everything toward
    him. He pulls the houses to the earth. If he didn’t they would fly away. Children, too,
    would fly away. You’ve seen the leaves fall, haven’t you? That’s because the Giant called
    them. Sometimes you drop a book. It’s because the Giant Gravitation asks for it. A ball
    goes up in the sky. The giant calls for it. Down it falls.



    “Is that all?”
    “Yes, isn’t it good?”
    “All right, you win. I wasn’t expecting such a present in return for the moat-bells.”
    “It wasn’t meant as a return present, or anything like that. I translated it because I thought
it was good. Don’t you think it’s good?” My master stares deep into the gold-rimmed
spectacles.
     “What a surprise! To think that you of all people had this talent. . .
     Well, well! I’ve certainly been taken in right and proper this time. I take my hat off to you.”
He is alone in his understanding. He’s talking to himself. The situation is quite beyond my
master’s grasp.
     “I’ve no intention of making you doff your cap. I translated this text simply because I thought
it was an interesting piece of writing.”
     “Indeed, yes! Most interesting! Quite as it should be! Smashing! I feel small.”
     “You don’t have to feel small. Since I recently gave up painting in watercolors, I’ve been
thinking of trying my hand at writing.”
     “And compared with your watercolors, which showed no sense of perspective, no
appreciation of differences in tone, your writings are superb. I am lost in admiration.”
     “Such encouraging words from you are making me positively enthusiastic about it,” says my
master, speaking from under his continuing mis-apprehension.
     Just then Mr. Coldmoon enters with the usual greeting.
     “Why, hello,” responds Waverhouse, “I’ve just been listening to a terrifically fine article and
the curtain has been rung down upon my moat-bells.” He speaks obliquely about something
incomprehensible.
     “Have you really?” The reply is equally incomprehensible. It is only my master who seems
not to be in any particularly light humor.
     “The other day,” he remarked, “a man called Beauchamp Blowlamp came to see me with
an introduction from you.”
     “Ah, did he? Beauchamp’s an uncommonly honest person, but, as he is also somewhat
odd, I was afraid that he might make himself a nuisance to you. However, since he had pressed
me so hard to be introduced to you. . .”
     “Not especially a nuisance. . .”
     “Didn’t he, during his visit, go on at length about his name?”
     “No, I don’t recall him doing so.”
     “No? He’s got a habit at first meeting of expatiating upon the singularity of his name.”
     “What is the nature of that singularity?” butts in Waverhouse, who has been waiting for
something to happen.
     “He gets terribly upset if someone pronounces Beauchamp as Beecham.”
     “Odd!” said Waverhouse, taking a pinch of tobacco from his gold-painted, leather tobacco
pouch.
     “Invariably he makes the immediate point that his name is not Beecham Blowlamp but Bo-
champ Blowlamp.”
     “That’s strange,” and Waverhouse inhales pricey tobacco-smoke deep into his stomach.
     “It comes entirely from his craze for literature. He likes the effect and is inexplicably proud
of the fact that his personal name and his family name can be made to rhyme with each other.
That’s why when one pronounces Beauchamp incorrectly, he grumbles that one does not
appreciate what he is trying to get across.”
     “He certainly is extraordinary.” Getting more and more interested, Waverhouse hauls back
the pipe smoke from the bottom of his stomach to let it loose at his nostrils. The smoke gets
lost en route and seems to be snagged in his gullet. Transferring the pipe to his hand, he
coughs chokingly.
     “When he was here the other day, he said he’d taken the part of a boatman at a meeting of
his Reading Society, and that he’d gotten himself laughed at by a gaggle of schoolgirls,” says
my master with a laugh.
     “Ah, that’s it, I remember.” Waverhouse taps his pipe upon his knees.
     This strikes me as likely to prove dangerous, so I move a little way farther off. “That
Reading Society, now. The other day when I treated him to moat-bells, he mentioned it. He said
they were going to make their second meeting a grand affair by inviting well-known literary
men, and he cordially invited me to attend. When I asked him if they would again try another of
Chikamatsu’s dramas of popular life, he said no and that they’d decided on a fairly modern play,
The Golden Demon. I asked him what role he would take and he said, ‘I’m going to play O-
miya.’
     Beauchamp as O-miya would certainly be worth seeing. I’m determined to attend the
meeting in his support.”
     “It’s going to be interesting, I think,” says Coldmoon and he laughs in an odd way.
     “But he is so thoroughly sincere, which is good, and has no hint of frivolousness about him.
Quite different from Waverhouse, for instance.” My master is revenged for Andrea del Sarto,
for peacocks’ tongues, and for moat-bells all in one go. Waverhouse appears to take no notice
of the remark.
     “Ah well, when all’s said and done, I’m nothing but a chopping board at Gyōtoku.”
     “Yes, that’s about it,” observes my master, although in fact he does not understand
Waverhouse’s involved method of describing himself as a highly sophisticated simpleton. But not
for nothing has he been so many years a schoolteacher. He is skilled in prevarication, and his
long experience in the classrooms can be usefully applied at such awkward moments in his
social life.
     “What is a chopping board at Gyōtoku?” asks the guileless Coldmoon.
     My master looks toward the alcove and pulverizes that chopping board at Gyōtoku by
saying, “Those narcissi are lasting well. I bought them on my way home from the public baths
toward the end of last year.”
     “Which reminds me,” says Waverhouse, twirling his pipe, “that at the end of last year I had
a really most extraordinary experience.”
     “Tell us about it.” My master, confident that the chopping board is now safely back in
Gyōtoku, heaves a sigh of relief. The extraordinary experience of Mr. Waverhouse fell thus
upon our ears:
     “If I remember correctly, it was on the twenty-seventh of December.
     Beauchamp had said he would like to come and hear me talk upon matters literary, and had
asked me to be sure to be in. Accordingly, I waited for him all the morning but he failed to turn
up. I had lunch and was seated in front of the stove reading one of Pain’s humorous books,
when a letter arrived from my mother in Shizuoka. She, like all old women, still thinks of me as
a child. She gives me all sorts of advice; that I mustn’t go out at night when the weather’s cold;
that unless the room is first well-heated by a stove, I’ll catch my death of cold every time I take
a bath. We owe much to our parents. Who but a parent would think of me with such solicitude?
Though normally I take things lightly and as they come, I confess that at that juncture the letter
affected me deeply. For it struck me that to idle my life away, as indeed I do, was rather a
waste. I felt that I must win honor for my family by producing a masterwork of literature or
something like that. I felt I would like the name of Doctor Waverhouse to become renowned,
that I should be acclaimed as a leading figure in Meiji literary circles, while my mother is still
alive.
      Continuing my perusal of the letter, I read,‘You are indeed lucky. While our young people
are suffering great hardships for the country in the war against Russia, you are living in happy-
go-lucky idleness as if life were one long New Year’s party organized for your particular
benefit!’
      Actually, I’m not as idle as my mother thinks. But she then proceeded to list the names of
my classmates at elementary school who had either died or had been wounded in the present
war. As, one after another, I read those names, the world grew hollow, all human life quite
futile.
      And she ended her letter by saying, ‘since I am getting old, perhaps this NewYear’s rice-
cakes will be my last. . .’ You will understand that, as she wrote so very dishearteningly, I grew
more and more depressed. I began to yearn for Beauchamp to come soon, but somehow he
didn’t. And at last it was time for supper. I thought of writing in reply to my mother, and I
actually wrote about a dozen lines. My mother’s letter was more than six feet long, but, unable
myself to match such a prodigious performance, I usually excuse myself after writing some ten
lines. As I had been sitting down for the whole of the day, my stomach felt strange and heavy.
Thinking that if Beauchamp did turn up he could jolly well wait, I went out for a walk to post my
letter. Instead of going toward Fujimicho, which is my usual course, I went, without my knowing
it, out toward the third embankment. It was a little cloudy that evening and a dry wind was
blowing across from the other side of the moat. It was terribly cold. A train coming from the
direction of Kagurazaka passed with a whistle along the lower part of the bank. I felt very
lonely. The end of the year, those deaths on the battlefield, senility, life’s insecurity, that time
and tide wait for no man, and other thoughts of a similar nature ran around in my head. One
often talks about hanging oneself.
      But I was beginning to think that one could be tempted to commit suicide just at such a time
as this. It so happened that at that moment I raised my head slightly, and, as I looked up to the
top of the bank, I found myself standing right below that very pine tree.”
      “That very pine tree? What’s that?” cuts in my master.
      “The pine for hanging heads,” says Waverhouse ducking his noddle.
      “Isn’t the pine for hanging heads that one at Ko-nodai?” Coldmoon amplifies the ripple.
      “The pine at Kōnodai is the pine for hanging temple bells. The pine at Dotesambanchō is
the one for hanging heads. The reason why it has acquired this name is that an old legend says
that anyone who finds himself under this pine tree is stricken with a desire to hang himself.
Though there are several dozen pine trees on the bank, every time someone hangs himself, it is
invariably on this particular tree that the body is found dangling. I can assure you there are at
least two or three such danglings every year. It would be unthinkable to go and dangle on any
other pine. As I stared at the tree I noted that a branch stuck out conveniently toward the
pavement. Ah! What an exquisitely fashioned branch. It would be a real pity to leave it as it is. I
wish so much that I could arrange for some human body to be suspended there. I look around
to see if anyone is coming. Unfortunately, no one comes. It can’t be helped.
      Shall I hang myself? No, no, if I hang myself, I’ll lose my life. I won’t because it’s
dangerous. But I’ve heard a story that an ancient Greek used to entertain banquet parties by
giving demonstrations of how to hang oneself. A man would stand on a stool and the very
second that he put his head through a noose, a second man would kick the stool from under
him. The trick was that the first man would loosen the knot in the rope just as his stool was
kicked away, and so drop down unharmed. If this story is really true, I’ve no need to be
frightened. So thinking I might try the trick myself, I place my hand on the branch and find it
bends in a manner precisely appropriate. Indeed the way it bends is positively aesthetic. I feel
extraordinarily happy as I try to picture myself floating on this branch. I felt I simply must try it,
but then I began to think that it would be inconsiderate if Beauchamp were waiting for me.
Right, I would first see Beauchamp and have the chat I’d promised; thereafter I could come out
again. So thinking, I went home.”
     “And is that the happy ending to your story?” asks my master.
     “Very interesting,” says Coldmoon with a broad grin.
     “When I got home, Beauchamp had not arrived. Instead, I found a postcard from him
saying that he was sorry he could not keep our appointment because of some pressing but
unexpected happening, and that he was looking forward to having a long interview with me in
the near future. I was relieved, and I felt happy, for now I could hang myself with an easy mind.
     Accordingly, I hurry back to the same spot, and then. . .” Waverhouse, assuming a
nonchalant air, gazes at Coldmoon and my master.
     “And then, what happened?” My master is becoming a little impatient.
     “We’ve now come to the climax,” says Coldmoon as he twists the strings of his surcoat.
     “And then, somebody had beaten me to it and had already hanged himself. I’m afraid I
missed the chance just by a second. I see now that I had been in the grip of the God of Death.
William James, that eminent philosopher, would no doubt explain that the region of the dead in
the world of one’s subliminal consciousness and the real world in which I actually exist, must
have interacted in mutual response in accordance with some kind of law of cause and effect.
But it really was extraordinary, wasn’t it?”Waverhouse looks quite demure.
     My master, thinking that he has again been taken in, says nothing but crams his mouth with
bean-jam cake and mumbles incoherently.
     Coldmoon carefully rakes smooth the ashes in the brazier and casts down his eyes,
grinning; eventually he opens his mouth. He speaks in an extremely quiet tone.
     “It is indeed so strange that it does not seem a thing likely to happen.
     On the other hand, because I myself have recently had a similar kind of experience, I can
readily believe it.”
     “What! Did you too want to stretch your neck?”
     “No, mine wasn’t a hanging matter. It seems all the more strange in that it also happened at
the end of last year, at about the same time and on the same day as the extraordinary
experience of Mr. Waverhouse.”
     “That’s interesting,” says Waverhouse. And he, too, stuffs his mouth with bean-jam cake.
     “On that day, there was a year-end party combined with a concert given at the house of a
friend of mine at Mūkōjima. I went there taking my violin with me. It was a grand affair with
fifteen or sixteen young or married ladies. Everything was so perfectly arranged that one felt it
was the most brilliant event of recent times. When the dinner and the concert were over, we sat
and talked late, and as I was about to take my leave, the wife of a certain doctor came up to
me and asked in whisper if I knew that Miss O was unwell. A few days earlier, when last I saw
Miss O, she had been looking well and normal. So I was surprised to hear this news, and my
immediate questions elicited the information that she had become feverish on the very evening
of the day when I’d last seen her, and that she was saying all sorts of curious things in her
delirium. What was worse, every now and again in that delirium, she was calling my name.”
     Not only my master but even Waverhouse refrain from making any such hackneyed remark
as “you lucky fellow.”They just listen in silence.
     “They fetched a doctor who examined her. According to the doctor’s diagnosis, though the
name of the disease was unknown, the high fever affecting the brain made her condition
dangerous unless the administration of soporifics worked as effectively as was to be hoped for.
As soon as I heard this news, a feeling of something awful grew within me. It was a heavy
feeling, as though one were having a nightmare, and all the surrounding air seemed suddenly to
be solidifying like a clamp upon my body. On my way home, moreover, I found I could think of
nothing else, and it hurt. That beautiful, that gay, that so healthy Miss O. . .”
     “Just a minute, please. You’ve mentioned Miss O about two times. If you’ve no objection,
we’d like to know her name wouldn’t we?” asks Waverhouse turning to look at my master. The
latter evades the question and says, “Hmm.”
     “No, I won’t tell you her name since it might compromise the person in question.”
     “Do you then propose to recount your entire story in such vague, ambiguous, equivocal, and
noncommittal terms?”
     “You mustn’t sneer. This is a serious story. Anyway, the thought of that young lady suffering
from so odd an ailment filled my heart with mournful emotion, and my mind with sad reflections
on the ephemerality of life. I felt suddenly depressed beyond all saying, as if every last ounce
of my vitality had, just like that, evaporated from my body. I staggered on, tottering and
wobbling, until I came to the Azuma Bridge. As I looked down, leaning on the parapet, the black
waters—at neap or ebb, I don’t know which—seemed to be coagulating, only just barely
moving. A rickshaw coming from the direction of Hanakawado ran over the bridge. I watched its
lamp grow smaller and smaller until it disappeared at the Sapporo Beer factory. Again, I looked
down at the water.
     And at that moment I heard a voice from upstream calling my name. It is most improbable
that anyone should be calling after me at this unlikely time of night, and, wondering whom it
could possibly be, I peered down to the surface of the water, but I could see nothing in the
darkness. Thinking it must have been my imagination, I had decided to go home, when I again
heard the voice calling my name. I stood dead-still and listened. When I heard it calling me for
the third time, though I was gripping the parapet firmly, my knees began to tremble
uncontrollably.
     The voice seemed to be coming either from far away or from the bottom of the river, but it
was unmistakably the voice of Miss O. In spite of myself I answered, ‘Yes.’ My answer was so
loud that it echoed back from the still water, and, surprised by my own voice, I looked around
me in a startled manner. There was no one to be seen. No dog. No moon. Nothing. At this very
second I experienced a sudden urge to immerse myself in that total darkness from which the
voice had summoned me. And, once again, the voice of Miss O pierced my ears painfully,
appealingly, as if begging for help. This time I cried,‘I’m coming now,’ and, leaning well out over
the parapet, I looked down into the somber depths. For, it seemed to me that the summoning
voice was surging powerfully up from beneath the waves. Thinking that the source of the
pleading must lie in the water directly below me, I at last managed to clamber onto the parapet.
I was determined that, next time the voice called out to me, I would dive straight in; and, as I
stood watching the stream, once again the thin thread of that pitiful voice came floating up to
me. This, I thought, is it; jumping high with all my strength, I came dropping down without regret
like a pebble, or something.”
     “So, you actually did dive in?” asks my master, blinking his eyes.
     “I never thought you’d go as far as that,” says Waverhouse pinching the tip of his nose.
     “After my dive I became unconscious, and for a while I seemed to be living in a dream. But
eventually I woke up, and, though I felt cold, I was not at all wet and did not feel as if I had
swallowed any water. Yet I was sure that I had dived. How very strange! Realizing that
something peculiar must have taken place, I looked around me and received a real shock.
     I’d meant to dive into the water but apparently I’d accidentally landed in the middle of the
bridge itself. I felt abysmally regretful. Having, by sheer mistake, jumped backwards instead of
forwards, I’d lost my chance to answer the summons of the voice.” Coldmoon smirks and
fiddles with the strings of his surcoat as if they were in some way irksome.
     “Ha-ha-ha, how very comical. It’s odd that your experience so much resembles mine. It,
too, could be adduced in support of the theories of Professor James. If you were to write it up
in an article entitled ‘The Human Response,’ it would astound the whole literary world. But
what,” persisted Waverhouse, “became of the ailing Miss O?”
     “When I called at her house a few days ago, I saw her just inside the gate playing
battledore and shuttlecock with her maid. So I expect she has completely recovered from her
illness.”
     My master, who for some time has been deep in thought, finally opens his mouth, and, in a
spirit of unnecessary rivalry, remarks, “I too have a strange experience to relate.”
     “You’ve got what?” In Waverhouse’s view, my master counts for so little that he is scarcely
entitled to have experiences.
     “Mine also occurred at the end of last year.”
     “It’s queer,” observed Coldmoon, “that all last year,” and he sniggers. A piece of bean-jam
cake adheres to the corner of his chipped front tooth.
     “And it took place, doubtless,” added Waverhouse, “at the very same time on the very
same day.”
     “No, I think the date is different: it was about the 20th. My wife had earlier asked me, as a
year’s-end present to herself, to take her to hear Settsu Daijō. I’d replied that I wouldn’t say no,
and asked her the nature of the program for that day. She consulted the newspapers and
answered that it was one of Chikamatsu’s suicide dramas, Unagidani. ‘Let’s not go today, I
don’t like Unagidani,’ said I. So we did not go that day. The next day my wife, bringing out the
newspaper again, said, ‘Today he’s doing the Monkey Man at Horikawa, so, let’s go.’ I said
let’s not, because Horikawa was so frivolous, just samisen-playing with no meat in it. My wife
went away looking discontented. The following day, she stated almost as a demand, ‘Today’s
program is The Temple With Thirty-Three Pillars. You may dislike the Temple quite as strongly
as you disliked all the others, but since the treat is intended to be for me, surely you won’t
object to taking me there.’ I responded,‘If you’ve set your heart on it so firmly, then we’ll go, but
since the performance has been announced as Settsu’s farewell appearance on the stage, the
house is bound to be packed full, and since we haven’t booked in advance, it will obviously be
impossible to get in. To start with, in order to attend such performances there’s an established
procedure to be observed. You have to go to the theatre-teahouse and there negotiate for seat
reservations. It would be hopeless to try going about it in the wrong way. You just can’t dodge
this proper procedure. So, sorry though I am, we simply cannot go today.’
     My wife’s eyes glittered fiercely. ‘Since I am a mere woman, I do not understand your
complicated procedures, but both Ohare’s mother and Kimiyo of the Suzuki family managed to
get in without observance of any such formalities, and they heard everything very well. I realize
that you are a teacher, but surely you don’t have to go through all that troublesome rigmarole
just to visit a theatre? It’s too bad. . . you are so. . .’ and her voice became tearful. I gave in.
‘All right. We’ll go to the theatre even if we can’t get into it. After an early supper we’ll take the
tram.’ She suddenly became quite lively. ‘If we’re going, we must be there by four o’clock, so
we mustn’t dilly-dally.’When I asked her why one had to be there by four o’clock, she explained
that Kimiyo had told her that, if one arrived any later, all the seats would be taken. I asked her
again, to make quite sure, if it would be fruitless to turn up later than four o’clock; and she
answered briskly,‘Of course it would be no good.’
       Then, d’you know, at that very moment the shivering set in.”
       “Do you mean your wife?” asks Coldmoon.
       “Oh, no, my wife was as fit as a fiddle. It was me. I had a sudden feeling that I was
shriveling like a pricked balloon. Then I grew giddy and unable even to move.”
       “You were taken ill with a most remarkable suddenness,” commented Waverhouse.
       “This is terrible. What shall I do? I’d like so much to grant my wife her wish, her one and
only request in the whole long year. All I ever do is scold her fiercely, or not speak to her, or
nag her about household expenses, or insist that she cares more carefully for the children; yet I
have never rewarded her for all her efforts in the domestic field. Today, luckily, I have the time
and the money available. I could easily take her on some little outing. And she very much wants
to go. Just as I very much want to take her. But much indeed as I want to take her, this icy
shivering and frightful giddiness make it impossible for me even to step down from the entrance
of my own house, let alone to climb up into a tram. The more I think how deeply I grieve for her,
the poor thing, the worse my shivering grows and the more giddy I become. I thought if I
consulted a doctor and took some medicine, I might get well before four o’clock. I discussed
the matter with my wife and sent for Mr. Amaki, Bachelor of Medicine. Unfortunately, he had
been on night duty at the university hospital and hadn’t yet come home. However, we received
every assurance that he was expected home by about two o’clock and that he would hurry
round to see me the minute he returned. What a nuisance. If only I could get some sedative, I
know I could be cured before four. But when luck is running against one, nothing goes well.
       Here I am, just this once in a long, long time, looking forward to seeing my wife’s happy
smile, and to be sharing in that happiness. My expectations seem sadly unlikely to be fulfilled.
My wife, with a most reproachful look, enquires whether it really is impossible for me to go out.
‘I’ll go; certainly I’ll go. Don’t worry. I’m sure I’ll be all right by four. Wash your face, get ready to
go out and wait for me.’ Though I uttered all these reassurance, my mind was shaken with
profound emotions. The shivering strengthens and accelerates, and my giddiness grows worse
and worse. Unless I do get well by four o’clock and implement my promise, one can never tell
what such a pusillanimous woman might do.
       What a wretched business. What should I do? As I thought it possible that the very worst
could happen, I began to consider whether perhaps it might be my duty as a husband to explain
to my wife, now while I was still in possession of my faculties, the dread truths concerning
mortality and the vicissitudes of life. For if the worst should happen, she would then at least be
prepared and less liable to be overcome by the paroxysms of her grief. I accordingly
summoned my wife to come immediately to my study. But when I began by saying,‘Though but
a woman you must be aware of that Western proverb which states that there is many a slip
“twixt the cup and the lip,”’ she flew into a fury.‘How should I know anything at all about such
sideways-written words? You’re deliberately making a fool of me by choosing to speak English
when you know perfectly well that I don’t understand a word of it. All right. So I can’t
understand English. But if you’re so besotted about English, why didn’t you marry one of those
girls from the mission schools? I’ve never come across anyone quite so cruel as you.’ In the
face of this tirade, my kindly feelings, my husbandly anxiety to prepare her for extremities, were
naturally damped down. I’d like you two to understand that it was not out of malice that I spoke
in English. The words sprang solely from a sincere sentiment of love for my wife. Consequently,
my wife’s malign interpretation of my motives left me feeling helpless. Besides, my brain was
somewhat disturbed by reason of the cold shivering and the giddiness; on top of all that, I was
understandably distraught by the effort of trying quickly to explain to her the truths of mortality
and the nature of the vicissitudes of life. That was why, quite unconsciously and forgetting that
my wife could not understand the tongue, I spoke in English. I immediately realized I was in the
wrong. It was all entirely my fault. But as a result of my blunder, the cold shivering intensified its
violence and my giddiness grew ever more viciously vertiginous. My wife, in accordance with
my instructions, proceeds to the bathroom and, stripping herself to the waist, completes her
make-up. Then, taking a kimono from a drawer, she puts it on. Her attitudes make it quite clear
that she is now ready to go out any time, and is simply waiting for me. I begin to get nervous.
Wishing that Mr. Amaki would arrive quickly, I look at my watch. It’s already three o’clock. Only
one hour to go. My wife slides open the study door and putting her head in, asks, ‘Shall we go
now?’ It may sound silly to praise one’s own wife, but I had never thought her quite so beautiful
as she was at that moment. Her skin, thoroughly polished with soap, gleams deliciously and
makes a marvelous contrast with the blackness of her silken surcoat. Her face has a kind of
radiance both externally and shining from within; partly because of the soap and partly because
of her intense longing to listen to Settsu Daijō. I feel I must, come what may, take her out to
satisfy that yearning. All right, perhaps I will make the awful effort to go out. I was smoking and
thinking along these lines when at long last Mr. Amaki arrived. Excellent. Things are turning out
as one would wish. However, when I told him about my condition,Amaki examined my tongue,
took my pulse, tapped my chest, stroked my back, turned my eyelids inside out, patted my
skull, and thereafter sank into deep thought for quite some time. I said to him, ‘It is my
impression that there may be some danger. . .’ but he replied,‘No, I don’t think there’s anything
seriously wrong.’ ‘I imagine it would be perfectly all right for him to go out for a little while?’
asked my wife.
      ‘Let me think.’ Amaki sank back into the profundities of thought, reemerging to
remark,‘Well, so long as he doesn’t feel unwell. . .’‘Oh, but I do feel unwell,’ I said. In that case
I’ll give you a mild sedative and some liquid medicine. . .’‘Yes please. This is going to be
something serious, isn’t it?’ ‘Oh no, there’s nothing to worry about. You mustn’t get nervous,’
said Amaki, and thereupon departed. It is now half past three.
      The maid was sent to fetch the medicine. In accordance with my wife’s imperative
instructions, the wretched girl not only ran the whole way there, but also the whole way back. It
is now a quarter to four. Fifteen minutes still to go. Then, quite suddenly, just about that time, I
began to feel sick. It came on with a quite extraordinary suddenness. All totally unexpected. My
wife had poured the medicine into a teacup and placed it in front of me, but as soon as I tried
to lift the teacup, some keck-keck thing stormed up from within the stomach. I am compelled to
put the teacup down. ‘Drink it up quickly’ urges my wife. Yes, indeed, I must drink it quickly and
go out quickly. Mustering all my courage to imbibe the potion I bring the teacup to my lips, when
again that insuppressible keck-keck thing prevents my drinking it. While this process of raising
the cup and putting it down is being several times repeated, the minutes crept on until the wall
clock in the living room struck four o’clock.
     Ting-ting-ting-ting. Four o’clock it is. I can no longer dilly-dally and I raise the teacup once
again. D’you know, it really was most strange. I’d say that it was certainly the uncanniest thing
I’ve ever experienced. At the fourth stroke my sickliness just vanished, and I was able to take
the medicine without any trouble at all. And, by about ten past four—here I must add that I now
realized for the first time how truly skilled a physician we have in Dr. Amaki—the shivering of my
back and the giddiness in my head both disappeared like a dream. Up to that point I had
expected that I was bound to be laid up for days, but to my great pleasure the illness proved to
have been completely cured.”
     “And did you two then go out to the theatre?” asks Waverhouse with the puzzled expression
of one who cannot see the point of a story.
     “We certainly both wanted to go, but since it had been my wife’s reiterated view that there
was no hope of getting in after four o’clock, what could we do? We didn’t go. If only Amaki had
arrived fifteen minutes earlier, I could have kept my promise and my wife would have been
satisfied. Just that fifteen minute difference. I was indeed distressed. Even now, when I think
how narrow the margin was, I am again distressed.”
     My master, having told his shabby tale, contrives to look like a person who has done his
duty. I imagine he feels he’s gotten even with the other two.
     “How very vexing,” says Coldmoon. His laugh, as usual, displays his broken tooth.
     Waverhouse, with a false naivety, remarks as if to himself. “Your wife, with a husband so
thoughtful and kind-hearted, is indeed a lucky woman.” Behind the sliding paper-door, we heard
the master’s wife make an harumphing noise as though clearing her throat.
     I had been quietly listening to the successive stories of these three precious humans, but I
was neither amused nor saddened by what I’d heard. I merely concluded that human beings
were good for nothing, except for the strenuous employment of their mouths for the purpose of
whiling away their time in laughter at things which are not funny, and in the enjoyment of
amusements which are not amusing. I have long known of my master’s selfishness and
narrowmindedness, but, because he usually has little to say, there was always something about
him which I could not understand. I’d felt a certain caution, a certain fear, even a certain respect
toward him on account of that aspect of his nature that I did not understand. But having heard
his story, my uncertainties suddenly coalesced into a mere contempt for him. Why can’t he
listen to the stories of the other two in silence? What good purpose can he serve by talking
such utter rubbish just because his competitive spirit has been roused? I wonder if, in his
portentous writings, Epictetus advocated any such course of action. In short, my
master,Waverhouse, and Coldmoon are all like hermits in a peaceful reign. Though they adopt a
nonchalant attitude, keeping themselves aloof from the crowd, segegrated like so many snake-
gourds swayed lightly by the wind, in reality they, too, are shaken by just the same greed and
worldly ambition as their fellow men.
     The urge to compete and their anxiety to win are revealed flickeringly in their everyday
conversation, and only a hair’s breadth separates them from the Philistines whom they spend
their idle days denouncing. They are all animals from the same den. Which fact, from a feline
viewpoint, is infinitely regrettable. Their only moderately redeeming feature is that their speech
and conduct are less tediously uninventive than those of less subtle creatures.
     As I thus summed up the nature of the human race, I suddenly felt the conversation of
these specimens to be intolerably boring, so I went around to the garden of the mistress of the
two-stringed harp to see how Tortoiseshell was getting on. Already the pine tree decorations
for the New Year and that season’s sacred festoons have been taken down. It is the 10th of
January. From a deep sky containing not even a single streak of cloud the glorious springtime
sun shines down upon the lands and seas of the whole wide world, so that even her tiny garden
seems yet more brilliantly lively than when it saw the dawn of New Year’s Day.
     There is a cushion on the veranda, the sliding paper-door is closed, and there’s nobody
about. Which probably means that the mistress has gone off to the public baths. I’m not at all
concerned if the mistress should be out, but I do very much worry about whether Tortoiseshell
is any better. Since everything’s so quiet and not a sign of a soul, I hop up onto the veranda
with my muddy paws and curl up right in the middle of the cushion, which I find comfortable. A
drowsiness came over me, and, forgetting all about Tortoiseshell, I was about to drop off into a
doze when suddenly I heard voices beyond the paper-door.
     “Ah, thanks. Was it ready?”The mistress has not gone out after all.
     “Yes, madam. I’m sorry to have taken such a long time. When I got there, the man who
makes Buddhist altar furniture told me he’d only just finished it.”
     “Well, let me see it. Ah, but it’s beautifully done. With this, Tortoiseshell can surely rest in
peace. Are you sure the gold won’t peel away?”
     “Yes, I’ve made sure of it. They said that as they had used the very best quality, it would
last longer than most human memorial tablets. They also said that the character for ‘honor’ in
Tortoiseshell’s posthumous name would look better if written in the cursive style, so they had
added the appropriate strokes.”
     “Is that so? Well, let’s put Myōyoshinnyo’s tablet in the family shrine and offer incense
sticks.”
     Has anything happened to Tortoiseshell? Thinking something must be wrong, I stand up on
the cushion. Ting! “Amen! Myōyoshinnyo. Save us, merciful Buddha! May she rest in peace.” It
is the voice of the mistress.
     “You, too, say prayers for her.”
     Ting! “Amen! Myōyoshinnyo. Save us, merciful Buddha! May she rest in peace.” Suddenly
my heart throbs violently. I stand dead-still upon the cushion, like a wooden cat; not even my
eyes are moving.
     “It really was a pity. It was only a cold at first.”
     “Perhaps if Dr. Amaki had given her some medicine, it might have helped.”
     “It was indeed Amaki’s fault. He paid too little regard to Tortoiseshell.”
     “You must not speak ill of other persons. After all, everyone dies when their allotted span is
over.”
     It seems thatTortoiseshell was also attended by that skilled physician, Dr. Amaki.
     “When all’s said and done, I believe the root cause was that the stray cat at the teacher’s
in the main street took her out too often.”
     “Yes, that brute.”
     I would like to exculpate myself, but realizing that at this juncture it behoves me to be
patient, I swallow hard and continue listening. There is a pause in the conversation.
     “Life does not always turn out as one wishes. A beauty like Tortoiseshell dies young. That
ugly stray remains healthy and flourishes in devilment. . .”
     “It is indeed so, Madam. Even if one searched high and low for a cat as charming as
Tortoiseshell, one would never find another person like her.”
     She didn’t say ‘another cat,’ she said ‘another person.’The maid seems to think that cats
and human beings are of one race. Which reminds me that the face of this particular maid is
strangely like a cat’s.
     “If only instead of our dear Tortoiseshell. . .”
     “. . . that wretched stray at the teacher’s had been taken. Then, Madam, how perfectly
everything would have gone. . .”
     If everything had gone that perfectly, I would have been in deep trouble. Since I have not
yet had the experience of being dead, I cannot say whether or not I would like it. But the other
day, it happening to be unpleasantly chilly, I crept into the tub for conserving half-used charcoal
and settled down upon its still-warm contents. The maid, not realizing I was in there, popped on
the lid. I shudder even now at the mere thought of the agony I then suffered. According to Miss
Blanche, the cat across the road, one dies if that agony continues for even a very short stretch.
I wouldn’t complain if I were asked to substitute for Tortoiseshell; but if one cannot die without
going through that kind of agony, I frankly would not care to die on anyone’s behalf.
     “Though a cat, she had her funeral service conducted by a priest and now she’s been given
a posthumous Buddhist name. I don’t think she would expect us to do more.”
     “Of course not, madam. She is indeed thrice blessed. The only comment that one might
make is that the funeral service read by the priest was, perhaps, a little wanting in gravity.”
     “Yes, and I thought it rather too brief. But when I remarked to the priest from the Gekkei
Temple ‘you’ve finished very quickly, haven’t you?’ he answered ‘I’ve done sufficient of the
effective parts, quite enough to get a kitty into Paradise.’”
     “Dear me! But if the cat in question were that unpleasant stray. . .”
     I have pointed out often enough that I have no name, but this maid keeps calling me “that
stray.” She is a vulgar creature.
     “So very sinful a creature. Madam, would never be able to rest in peace, however many
edifying texts were read for its salvation.”
     I do not know how many hundreds of times I was thereafter stigmatized as a stray. I
stopped listening to their endless babble while it was still only half-run, and, slipping down from
the cushion, I jumped off the veranda. Then,simultaneously erecting every single one of my
eighty-eight thousand, eight hundred, eighty hairs, I shook my whole body.
     Since that day I have not ventured near the mistress of the two-stringed harp. No doubt by
now she herself is having texts of inadequate gravity read on her behalf by the priest from the
Gekkei Temple.
     Nowadays I haven’t even energy to go out. Somehow life seems weary. I have become as
indolent a cat as my master is an indolent human. I have come to understand that it is only
natural that people should so often explain my master’s self-immurement in his study as the
result of a love affair gone wrong.
     As I have never caught a rat, that O-san person once proposed that I should be expelled;
but my master knows that I’m no ordinary common or garden cat, and that is why I continue to
lead an idle existence in this house. For that understanding I am deeply grateful to my master.
What’s more, I take every opportunity to show the respect due to his perspicacity. I do not get
particularly angry with O-san’s ill-treatment of me, for she does not understand why I am as I
now am. But when, one of these days, some master sculptor, some regular Hidari Jingorō,
comes and carves my image on a temple gate; when some Japanese equivalent of the French
master portraitist, Steinlein, immortalizes my features on a canvas, then at last will the silly
purblind beings in shame regret their lack of insight.
                                                 III



       ORTOISESHELL is dead,one cannot consort with Rickshaw Blacky, and I feel a little

T      lonely. Luckily I have made acquaintances among humankind so I do not suffer from any
       real sense of boredom. Someone wrote recently asking my master to have my
       photograph taken and the picture sent to him. And then the other day somebody else
presented some millet dumplings, that speciality of Okayama, specifically addressed to me.
The more that humans show me sympathy, the more I am inclined to forget that I am a cat.
Feeling that I am now closer to humans than to cats, the idea of rallying my own race in an
effort to wrest supremacy from the bipeds no longer has the least appeal. Moreover, I have
developed, indeed evolved, to such an extent that there are now times when I think of myself as
just another human in the human world; which I find very encouraging. It is not that I look down
on my own race, but it is no more than natural to feel most at ease among those whose
attitudes are similar to one’s own. I would consequently feel somewhat piqued if my growing
penchant for mankind were stigmatized as fickleness or flippancy or treachery. It is precisely
those who sling such words about in slanderous attacks on others who are usually both drearily
straight-laced and born unlucky. Having thus graduated from felinity to humanity, I find myself no
longer able to confine my interests to the world of Tortoiseshell and Blacky. With a haughtiness
not less prideful than that of human beings, I, too, now like to judge and criticize their thoughts
and words and deeds. This, surely, is equally natural. Yet, though I have become thus proudly
conscious of my own dignity, my master still regards me as a cat only slightly superior to any
other common or garden moggy. For, as if they were his own and without so much as a by-
your-leave to me, he has eaten all the millet dumplings; which is, I find, regrettable. Nor does
he seem yet to have dispatched my photograph. I suppose I would be justified if I made this
fact a cause for grumbling, but after all, if our opinions—my master’s and mine—are naturally at
difference, the consequences of that difference cannot be helped. Since I am seeking to
behave with total humanity, I’m finding it increasingly difficult to write about the activities of cats
with whom I no longer associate. I must accordingly seek the indulgence of my readers if I now
confine my writing to reports about such respected figures as Waverhouse and Coldmoon.
     Today is a Sunday and the weather fine. The master has therefore crept out of his study,
and, placing a brush, an ink stone, and a writing pad in a row before him, he now lies flat on his
belly beside me, and is groaning hard. I watch him, thinking that he is perhaps making this
peculiar noise in the birth pangs of some literary effort. After a while, and in thick black strokes,
he wrote, “Burn incense.” Is it going to be a poem or a haiku? Just when I was thinking that the
phrase was rather too witty for my master, he abandons it, and, his brush running quickly over
the paper, writes an entirely new line: “Now for some little time I have been thinking of writing
an article about Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man.” At this point the brush stops dead. My
master, brush in hand, racks his brains, but no bright notions seem to emerge for he now starts
licking the head of his brush. I watched his lips acquire a curious inkiness. Then, underneath
what he had just written, he drew a circle, put in two dots as eyes, added a nostrilled nose in
the center, and finally drew a single sideways line for a mouth. One could not call such
creations either haiku or prose. Even my master must have been disgusted with himself, for he
quickly smeared away the face. He then starts a new line. He seems to have some vague
notion that, provided he himself produces a new line, maybe some kind of a Chinese poem will
evolve itself.
      After further moonings, he suddenly started writing briskly in the colloquial style. “Mr. the-
late-and-sainted Natural Man is one who studies Infinity, reads the Analects of Confucius, eats
baked yams, and has a runny nose.” A somewhat muddled phrase. He thereupon read the
phrase aloud in a declamatory manner and, quite unlike his usual self, laughed. “Ha-ha-ha.
Interesting! But that ‘runny nose’ is a shade cruel, so I’ll cross it out,” and he proceeds to draw
lines across that phrase.
      “Though a single line would clearly have sufficed, he draws two lines and then three lines.
He goes on drawing more and more lines regardless of their crowding into the neighboring line
of writing. When he has drawn eight such obliterations, he seems unable to think of anything to
add to his opening outburst. So he takes to twirling his mustache, determined to wring some
telling sentence from his whiskers. He is still twisting them up and twirling them down when his
wife appears from the living room, and sitting herself down immediately before my master’s
nose, remarks, “My dear.”
      “What is it?” My master’s voice sounds dully like a gong struck under water. His wife
seems not to like the answer, for she starts all over again.
      “My dear!” she says.
      “Well, what is it?”
      This time, cramming a thumb and index finger into a nostril, he yanks out nostril hairs.
      “We are a bit short this month. . .”
      “Couldn’t possibly be short. We’ve settled the doctor’s fee and we paid off the bookshop’s
bill last month. So this month, there ought in fact to be something left over.” He coolly examines
his uprooted nostril hairs as though they were some wonder of the world.
      “But because you, instead of eating rice, have taken to bread and jam. . .”
      “Well, how many tins of jam have I gone through?”
      “This month, eight tins were emptied.”
      “Eight? I certainly haven’t eaten that much.”
      “It wasn’t only you. The children also lick it.”
      “However much one licks, one couldn’t lick more than two or three shillings worth.” My
master calmly plants his nostril hairs, one by one, on the writing pad. The sticky-rooted bristles
stand upright on the paper like a little copse of needles. My master seems impressed by this
unexpected discovery and he blows upon them. Being so sticky, they do not fly away.
      “Aren’t they obstinate?” he says and blows upon them frantically.
      “It is not only the jam. There’s other things we have to buy.” The lady of the house
expresses her extreme dissatisfaction by pouting sulkily.
      “Maybe.” Again inserting his thumb and finger, he extracts some hairs with a jerk. Among
these hairs of various hue, red ones and black ones, there is a single pure white bristle. My
master who, with a look of great surprise, has been staring at this object, proceeds to show it
to his wife, holding it up between his fingers right in front of her face.
      “No, don’t.” She pushes his hand away with a grimace of distaste.
      “Look at it! A white hair from the nostrils.” My master seems to be immensely impressed.
His wife, resigned, went back into the living room with a laugh. She seems to have given up
hope of getting any answer to her problems of domestic economy. My master resumes his
consideration of the problems of Natural Man.
     Having succeeded in driving off his wife with his scourge of nostril hair, he appears to feel
relieved, and, while continuing that depilation, struggles to get on with his article. But his brush
remains unmoving.
     “That ‘eats baked yams’ is also superfluous. Out with it.” He deletes the phrase. “And
‘incense burns’ is somewhat over-abrupt, so let’s cross that out too.” His exuberant self-
criticism leaves nothing on the paper but the single sentence “Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural
Man is one who studies Infinity and reads the Analects of Confucius.” My master thinks this
statement a trifle over-simplified. “Ah well, let’s not be bothered: let’s abandon prose and just
make it an inscription.” Brandishing the brush crosswise, he paints vigorously on the writing pad
in that watercolor style so common among literary men and produces a very poor study of an
orchid. Thus all his precious efforts to write an article have come down to this mere nothing.
Turning the sheet, he writes something that makes no sense. “Born in Infinity, studied Infinity,
and died into Infinity.
     Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man. Infinity.” At this moment Waverhouse drifts into the
room in his usual casual fashion. He appears to make no distinction between his own and other
people’s houses; unannounced and unceremoniously, he enters any house and, what’s more,
will sometimes float in unexpectedly through a kitchen door. He is one of those who, from the
moment of their birth, discaul themselves of all such tiresome things as worry, reserve, scruple,
and concern.
     “‘Giant Gravitation again?’” asks Waverhouse still standing.
     “How could I be always writing only about ‘Giant Gravitation?’ I’m trying to compose an
epitaph for the tombstone of Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man,” replied my master with
considerable exaggeration.
     “Is that some sort of posthumous Buddhist name like Accidental Child?” inquires
Waverhouse in his usual irrelevant style.
     “Is there then someone called Accidental Child?”
     “No, of course there isn’t, but I take it that you’re working on something like that.”
     “I don’t think Accidental Child is anyone I know. But Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man is
a person of your own acquaintance.”
     “Who on earth could get a name like that?”
     “It’s Sorosaki. After he graduated from the University, he took a post-graduate course
involving study of the ‘theory of infinity.’ But he over-worked, got peritonitis, and died of it.
Sorosaki happened to be a very close friend of mine.”
     “All right, so he was your very close friend. I’m far from criticizing that fact. But who was
responsible for converting Sorosaki into Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man?”
     “Me. I created that name. For there is really nothing more philistine than the posthumous
names conferred by Buddhist priests.” My master boasts as if his nomination of Natural Man
were a feat of artistry.
     “Anyway, let’s see the epitaph,” says Waverhouse laughingly. He picks up my master’s
manuscript and reads it out aloud. “Eh . . .‘Born into infinity, studied infinity, and died into infinity.
Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man. Infinity.’ I see. This is fine. Quite appropriate for poor old
Sorosaki.”
     “Good, isn’t it?” says my master obviously very pleased.
     “You should have this epitaph engraved on a weight-stone for pickles and then leave it at
the back of the main hall of some temple for the practice-benefit of passing weight lifters. It’s
good. It’s most artistic. Mr. the-late-and-sainted may now well rest in peace.”
     “Actually, I’m thinking of doing just that,” answers my master quite seriously. “But you’ll have
to excuse me,” he went on, “I won’t be long.
     Just play with the cat. Don’t go away.” And my master departed like the wind without even
waiting for Waverhouse to answer.
     Being thus unexpectedly required to entertain the culture-vulture Waverhouse, I cannot very
well maintain my sour attitude. Accordingly, I mew at him encouragingly and sidle up on to his
knees. “Hello,” says Waverhouse, “you’ve grown distinctly chubby. Let’s take a look at you.”
     Grabbing me impolitely by the scruff of my neck he hangs me up in midair. “Cats like you
that let their hind legs dangle are cats that catch no mice. . . Tell me,” he said, turning to my
master’s wife in the next room, “has he ever caught anything?”
     “Far from catching so much as a single mouse, he eats rice-cakes and then dances.” The
lady of the house unexpectedly probes my old wound, which embarrassed me. Especially when
Waverhouse still held me in midair like a circus-performer.
     “Indeed, with such a face, it’s not surprising that he dances. Do you know, this cat
possesses a truly insidious physionomy. He looks like one of those goblin-cats illustrated in the
old storybooks.” Waverhouse, babbling whatever comes into his head, tries to make
conversation with the mistress. She reluctantly interrupts her sewing and comes into the room.
     “I do apologize. You must be bored. He won’t be long now.” And she poured fresh tea for
him.
     “I wonder where he’s gone.”
     “Heaven only knows. He never explains where he’s going. Probably to see his doctor.”
     “You mean Dr. Amaki? What a misfortune for Amaki to be involved with such a patient.”
     Perhaps finding this comment difficult to answer, she answers briefly:
     “Well, yes.”
     Waverhouse takes not the slightest notice, but goes on to ask, “How is he lately? Is his
weak stomach any better?”
     “It’s impossible to say whether it’s better or worse. However carefully Dr. Amaki may look
after him, I don’t see how his health can ever improve if he continues to consume such vast
quantities of jam.” She thus works off on Waverhouse her earlier grumblings to my master.
     “Does he eat all that much jam? It sounds like a child.”
     “And not just jam. He’s recently taken to guzzling grated radish on the grounds that it’s a
sovereign cure for dyspepsia.”
     “You surprise me,” marvels Waverhouse.
     “It all began when he read in some rag that grated radish contains diastase.”
     “I see. I suppose he reckons that grated radish will repair the ravages of jam. It’s certainly
an ingenious equation.” Waverhouse seems vastly diverted by her recital of complaint.
     “Then only the other day he forced some on the baby.”
     “He made the baby eat jam?”
     “No, grated radish! Would you believe it? He said, ‘Come here, my little babykin, father’ll
give you something good. . .’Whenever, once in a rare while, he shows affection for the
children, he always does remarkably silly things. A few days ago he put our second daughter
on top of a chest of drawers.”
      “What ingenious scheme was that?” Waverhouse looks to discover ingenuities in everything.
      “There was no question of any ingenious scheme. He just wanted the child to make the
jump when it’s quite obvious that a little girl of three or four is incapable of such tomboy feats.”
      “I see. Yes, that proposal does indeed seem somewhat lacking in ingenuity. Still, he’s a
good man without an ill wish in his heart.”
      “Do you think that I could bear it if, on top of everything else, he were ill-natured?” She
seems in uncommonly high spirits.
      “Surely you don’t have cause for such vehement complaint? To be as comfortably off as
you are is, after all, the best way to be. Your husband neither leads the fast life nor squanders
money on dandified clothing.
      He’s a born family man of quiet taste.”Waverhouse fairly lets himself go in unaccustomed
laud of an unknown way of life.
      “On the contrary, he’s not at all like that. . .”
      “Indeed? So he has secret vices? Well, one cannot be too careful in this world.”
Waverhouse offers a nonchalantly fluffy comment.
      “He has no secret vices, but he is totally abandoned in the way he buys book after book,
never to read a single one. I wouldn’t mind if he used his head and bought in moderation, but
no. Whenever the mood takes him, he ambles off to the biggest bookshop in the city and brings
back home as many books as chance to catch his fancy. Then, at the end of the month, he
adopts an attitude of complete detachment. At the end of last year, for instance, I had a terrible
time coping with the bill that had been accumulating month after month.”
      “It doesn’t matter that he should bring home however many books he may like. If, when the
bill collector comes, you just say that you’ll pay some other time, he’ll go away.”
      “But one cannot put things off indefinitely.” She looks cast down.
      “Then you should explain the matter to your husband and ask him to cut down expenditure
on books.”
      “And do you really believe he would listen to me? Why, only the other day, he said,‘You are
so unlike a scholar’s wife: you lack the least understanding of the value of books. Listen
carefully to this story from ancient Rome. It will give you beneficial guidance for your future
conduct.’”
      “That sounds interesting. What sort of story was it?” Waverhouse becomes enthusiastic,
though he appears less sympathetic to her predicament than prompted by sheer curiosity.
      “It seems there was in ancient Rome a king named Tarukin.”
      “Tarukin? That sounds odd in Japanese.”
      “I can never remember the names of foreigners. It’s all too difficult. Maybe he was a barrel
of gold. He was, at any rate, the seventh king of Rome.”
      “Really? The seventh barrel of gold certainly sounds queer. But, tell me, what then
happened to this seventh Tarukin.”
      “You mustn’t tease me like that. You quite embarrass me. If you know this king’s true name,
you should teach me it. Your attitude,” she snaps at him, “is really most unkind.”
      “I tease you? I wouldn’t dream of doing such an unkind thing. It was simply that the seventh
barrel of gold sounded so wonderful. Let’s see.
      . . a Roman, the seventh king. . . I can’t be absolutely certain but I rather think it must have
been Tarquinius Superbus,Tarquin the Proud. Well, it doesn’t really matter who it was. What did
this monarch do?”
     “I understand that some woman, Sibyl by name, went to this king with nine books and
invited him to buy them.”
     “I see.”
     “When the king asked her how much she wanted, she stated a very high price, so high that
the king asked for a modest reduction. Whereupon the woman threw three of the nine books
into the fire where they were quickly burnt to ashes.”
     “What a pity!”
     “The books were said to contain prophecies, predictions, things like that of which there was
no other record anywhere.”
     “Really?”
     “The king, believing that six books were bound to be cheaper than nine, asked the price of
the remaining volumes. The price proved to be exactly the same; not one penny less. When the
king complained of this outrageous development, the women threw another three books into the
fire. The king apparently still hankered for the books and he accordingly asked the price of the
last three left. The woman again demanded the same price as she had asked for the original
nine. Nine books had shrunk to six, and then to three, but the price remained unaltered even by
a farthing.
     Suspecting that any attempt to bargain would merely lead the woman to pitch the last three
volumes into the flames, the king bought them at the original staggering price. My husband
appeared confident that, having heard this story, I would begin to appreciate the value of
books, but I don’t at all see what it is that I’m supposed to have learnt to appreciate.”
     Having thus stated her own position, she as good as challenges Waverhouse to contravert
her. Even the resourceful Waverhouse seems to be at a loss. He draws a handkerchief from
the sleeve of his kimono and tempts me to play with it. Then, in a loud voice as if an idea had
suddenly struck him, he remarked, “But you know, Mrs. Sneaze, it is precisely because your
husband buys so many books and fills his head with wild notions that he is occasionally
mentioned as a scholar, or something of that sort. Only the other day a comment on your
husband appeared in a literary magazine.”
     “Really?” She turns around. After all, it’s only natural that his wife should feel anxiety about
comments on my master.
     “What did it say?”
     “Oh, only a few lines. It said that Mr. Sneaze’s prose was like a cloud that passes in the
sky, like water flowing in a stream.”
     “Is that,” she asks smiling, “all that it said?”
     “Well, it also said ‘it vanishes as soon as it appears and, when it vanishes, it is forever
forgetful to return.’”
     The lady of the house looks puzzled and asks anxiously “Was that praise?”
     “Well, yes, praise of a sort,” says Waverhouse coolly as he jiggles his handkerchief in front
of me.
     “Since books are essential to his work, I suppose one shouldn’t complain, but his
eccentricity is so pronounced that. . .”
     Waverhouse assumes that she’s adopting a new line of attack. “True,” he interrupts, “he is
a little eccentric, but any man who pursues learning tends to get like that.” His answer,
excellently noncommittal, contrives to combine ingratiation and special pleading.
     “The other day, when he had to go somewhere soon after he got home from school, he
found it too troublesome to change his clothes.
     So do you know, he sat down on his low desk without even taking off his overcoat and ate
his dinner just as he was. He had his tray put on the footwarmer while I sat on the floor holding
the rice container. It was really very funny. . .”
     “It sounds like the old-time custom when generals sat down to identify the severed heads
of enemies killed in battle. But that would be quite typical of Mr. Sneaze. At any rate he’s never
boringly conventional.”
     Waverhouse offers a somewhat strained compliment.
     “A woman cannot say what’s conventional or unconventional, but I do think his conduct is
often unduly odd.”
     “Still, that’s better than being conventional.” As Waverhouse moves firmly to the support of
my master, her dissatisfaction deepens.
     “People are always saying this or that is conventional, but would you please tell what
makes a thing conventional?” Adopting a defiant attitude, she demands a definition of
conventionality.
     “Conventional? When one says something is conventional. . . It’s a bit difficult to explain. . .”
     “If it’s so vague a thing, surely there’s nothing wrong with being conventional.” She begins
to corner Waverhouse with typically feminine logic.
     “No, it isn’t vague, it’s perfectly clear-cut. But it’s hard to explain.”
     “I expect you call everything you don’t like conventional.” Though totally uncalculated, her
words land smack on target. Waverhouse is now indeed cornered and can no longer dodge
defining the conventional.
     “I’ll give you an example. A conventional man is one who would yearn after a girl of sixteen
or eighteen but, sunk in silence, never do anything about it; a man who, whenever the weather’s
fine, would do no more than stroll along the banks of the Sumida taking, of course, a flask of
saké with him.”
     “Are there really such people?” Since she cannot make heads or tails of the twaddle
vouchsafed by Waverhouse, she begins to abandon her position, which she finally surrenders
by saying, “It’s all so complicated that it’s really quite beyond me.”
     “You think that complicated? Imagine fitting the head of Major Pendennis onto Bakin’s
torso, wrapping it up and leaving it all for one or two years exposed to European air.”
     “Would that produce a conventional man?” Waverhouse offers no reply but merely laughs.
     “In fact it could be produced without going to quite so much trouble.
     If you added a shop assistant from a leading store to any middle school student and
divided that sum by two, then indeed you’d have a fine example of a conventional man.”
     “Do you really think so?” She looks puzzled but certainly unconvinced.
     “Are you still here?” My master sits himself down on the floor beside Waverhouse. We had
not noticed his return.
     “ ‘Still here’ is a bit hard. You said you wouldn’t be long and you yourself invited me to wait
for you.”
     “You see, he’s always like that,” remarks the lady of the house leaning toward Waverhouse.
     “While you were away I heard all sorts of tales about you.”
     “The trouble with women is that they talk too much. It would be good if human beings would
keep as silent as this cat.” And the master strokes my head.
     “I hear you’ve been cramming grated radish into the baby.”
     “Hum,” says my master and laughs. He then added “Talking of the baby, modern babies are
quite intelligent. Since that time when I gave our baby grated radish, if you ask him ‘where is
the hot place?’ he invariably sticks out his tongue. Isn’t it strange?”
     “You sound as if you were teaching tricks to a dog. It’s positively cruel. By the way,
Coldmoon ought to have arrived by now.”
     “Is Coldmoon coming?” asks my master in a puzzled voice.
     “Yes. I sent him a postcard telling him to be here not later than one o’clock.”
     “How very like you! Without even asking us if it happened to be convenient. What’s the idea
of asking Coldmoon here?”
     “It’s not really my idea, but Coldmoon’s own request. It seems he is going to give a lecture
to the Society of Physical Science. He said he needed to rehearse his speech and asked me to
listen to it. Well, I thought it would be obliging to let you hear it, too. Accordingly, I suggested
he should come to your house. Which should be quite convenient since you are a man of
leisure. I know you never have any engagements.
     You’d do well to listen.” Waverhouse thinks he knows how to handle the situation.
     “I wouldn’t understand a lecture on physical science,” says my master in a voice betraying
his vexation at his friend’s high-handed action.
     “On the contrary, his subject is no such dry-as-dust matter as, for example, the magnetized
nozzle. The transcendentally extraordinary subject of his discourse is ‘The Mechanics of
Hanging.’Which should be worth listening to.”
     “Inasmuch as you once only just failed to hang yourself, I can understand your interest in
the subject, but I’m. . .”
     “. . . The man who got cold shivers over going to the theatre, so you cannot expect not to
listen to it.” Waverhouse interjects one of his usual flippant remarks and Mrs. Sneaze laughs.
Glancing back at her husband, she goes off into the next room. My master, keeping silent,
strokes my head. This time, for once, he stroked me with delicious gentleness.
     Some seven minutes later in comes the anticipated Coldmoon. Since he’s due to give his
lecture this same evening, he is not wearing his usual get-up. In a fine frock-coat and with a
high and exceedingly white clean collar, he looks twenty per cent more handsome than himself.
“Sorry to be late.” He greets his two seated friends with perfect composure.
     “It’s ages that we’ve now been waiting for you. So we’d like you to start right away.
Wouldn’t we?” says Waverhouse, turning to look at my master. The latter, thus forced to
respond, somewhat reluctantly says,
     “Hmm.” But Coldmoon’s in no hurry. He remarks, “I think I’ll have a glass of water, please.”
     “I see you are going to do it in real style. You’ll be calling next for a round of applause.”
Waverhouse, but he alone, seems to be enjoying himself.
     Coldmoon produced his text from an inside pocket and observed,
     “Since it is the established practice, may I say I would welcome criticism.”That invitation
made, he at last begins to deliver his lecture.
     “Hanging as a death penalty appears to have originated among the Anglo-Saxons.
Previously, in ancient times, hanging was mainly a method of committing suicide. I understand
that among the Hebrews it was customary to execute criminals by stoning them to death. Study
of the Old Testament reveals that the word ‘hanging’ is there used to mean ‘suspending a
criminal’s body after death for wild beasts and birds of prey to devour it.’According to
Herodotus, it would seem that the Jews, even before they departed from Egypt, abominated
the mere thought that their dead bodies might be left exposed at night. The Egyptians used to
behead a criminal, nail the torso to a cross and leave it exposed during the night. The Persians.
. .”
     “Steady on, Coldmoon,” Waverhouse interrupts. “You seem to be drifting farther and farther
away from the subject of hanging. Do you think that wise?”
     “Please be patient. I am just coming to the main subject. Now, with respect to the Persians.
They, too, seemed to have used crucifixion as a method of criminal execution. However,
whether the nailing took place while the criminal was alive or simply after his death is not
incontrovertibly established.”
     “Who cares? Such details are really of little importance,” yawned my master as from
boredom.
     “There are still many matters of which I’d like to inform you but, as it will perhaps prove
tedious for you . . .”
     “ ‘As it might prove’ would sound better than ‘as it will perhaps prove.’ What d’you think,
Sneaze?” Waverhouse starts carping again but my master answers coldly, “What difference
could it make?”
     “I have now come to the main subject, and will accordingly recite my piece.”
     “A storyteller ‘recites a piece.’An orator should use more elegant diction.”Waverhouse again
interrupts.
     “If to ‘recite my piece’ sounds vulgar, what words should I use?” asks Coldmoon in a voice
that showed he was somewhat nettled.
     “It is never clear, when one is dealing with Waverhouse, whether he’s listening or
interrupting. Pay no attention to his heckling, Coldmoon, just keep going.” My master seeks to
find a way through the difficulty as quickly as possible.
     “So, having made your indignant recitation, now I suppose you’ve found the willow tree?”
With a pun on a little known haiku, Waverhouse, as usual, comes up with something odd.
Coldmoon, in spite of himself, broke into laughter.
     “My researches reveal that the first account of the employment of hanging as a deliberate
means of execution occurs in the Odyssey, volume twenty-two. The relevant passage records
how Telemachus arranged the execution by hanging of Penelope’s twelve ladies-in-waiting. I
could read the passage aloud in its original Greek, but, since such an act might be regarded as
an affectation, I will refrain from doing so. You will, however, find the passage between lines
465 and 473.”
     “You’d better cut out all that Hellenic stuff. It sounds as if you are just showing off your
knowledge of Greek. What do you think, Sneaze?”
     “On that point, I agree with you. It would be more modest, altogether an improvement, to
avoid such ostentation.” Quite unusually my master immediately sides with Waverhouse. The
reason is, of course, that neither can read a word of Greek.
     “Very well, I will this evening omit those references. And now I will recite. . . that is to say, I
will now continue. Let us consider, then, how a hanging is actually carried out. One can
envisage two methods. The first method is that adopted by Telemachus who, with the help of
Eumaeus and Philoetios, tied one end of a rope to the top of a pillar: next, having made several
loose loops in the rope, he forced a woman’s head through each such loop, and finally hauled
up hard on the other end of the rope.”
     “In short, he had the women dangling in a row like shirts hung out at a laundry. Right?”
     “Exactly. Now the second method is, as in the first case, to tie one end of a rope to the top
of a pillar and similarly to secure the other end of the rope somewhere high up on the ceiling.
Thereafter, several other short ropes are attached to the main rope, and in each of these
subsidiary ropes a slipknot is then tied. The women’s heads are then inserted in the slipknots.
The idea is that at the crucial moment you remove the stools on which the women have been
stood.”
     “They would then look something like those ball-shaped paper-lanterns one sometimes
sees suspended from the end-tips of rope curtains, wouldn’t they?” hazarded Waverhouse.
     “That I cannot say,” answered Coldmoon cautiously. “I have never seen any such ball as a
paper-lantern-ball, but if such balls exist, the resemblance may be just. Now, the first method
as described in the Odyssey is, in fact, mechanically impossible; and I shall proceed, for your
benefit, to substantiate that statement.”
     “How interesting,” says Waverhouse.
     “Indeed, most interesting,” adds my master.
     “Let us suppose that the women are to be hanged at intervals of an equal distance, and
that the rope between the two women nearest the ground stretches out horizontally, right? Now
α1, α2 up to α6 become the angles between the rope and the horizon. T1, T2, and so on up to
T6 represent the force exerted on each section of the rope, so that T7 = X is the force exerted
on the lowest part of the rope. W is, of course, the weight of the women. So far so good. Are
you with me?”
     My master and Waverhouse exchange glances and say, “Yes, more or less.” I need hardly
point out that the value of this “more or less” is singular to Waverhouse and my master. It could
possibly have a different value for other people.
     “Well, in accordance with the theory of averages as applied to the polygon, a theory with
which you must of course be well acquainted, the following twelve equations can, in this
particular case, be established:
     T1 cos αl=T2 cos α2......(1)
     T2 cos α2=T3 cos α3......(2)”
     “I think that’s enough of the equations,” my master irresponsibly remarks.
     “But these equations are the very essence of my lecture.” Coldmoon really seems reluctant
to be parted from them.
     “In that case, let’s hear those particular parts of its very essence at some other time.”
Waverhouse, too, seems out of his depth.
     “But if I omit the full detail of the equations, it becomes impossible to substantiate the
mechanical studies to which I have devoted so much effort. . .”
     “Oh, never mind that. Cut them all out,” came the cold-blooded comment of my master.
     “That’s most unreasonable. However, since you insist, I will omit them.”
     “That’s good,” says Waverhouse, unexpectedly clapping his hands.
     “Now we come to England where, in Beowulf, we find the word ‘gallows’: that is to say
‘galga.’ It follows that hanging as a penalty must have been in use as early as the period with
which the book is concerned.
     According to Blackstone, a convicted person who is not killed at his first hanging by reason
of some fault in the rope should simply be hanged again. But, oddly enough, one finds it stated
in The Vision of Piers Plowman that even a murderer should not be strung up twice. I do not
know which statement is correct, but there are many melancholy instances of victims failing to
be killed outright. In 1786 the authorities attempted to hang a notorious villain named Fitzgerald,
but when the stool was removed, by some strange chance the rope broke. At the next attempt
the rope proved so long that his legs touched ground and he again survived. In the end, at the
third attempt, he was enabled to die with the help of the spectators.”
     “Well, well,” says Waverhouse becoming, as was only to be expected, re-enlivened.
     “A true thanatophile.” Even my master shows signs of jollity.
     “There is one other interesting fact. A hanged person grows taller by about an inch. This is
perfectly true. Doctors have measured it.”
     “That’s a novel notion. How about it, Sneaze?” says Waverhouse turning to my master. “Try
getting hanged. If you were an inch taller, you might acquire the appearance of an ordinary
human being.” The reply, however, was delivered with an unexpected gravity.
     “Tell me, Coldmoon, is there any chance of surviving that process of extension by one
inch?”
     “Absolutely none. The point is that it is the spinal cord which gets stretched in hanging. It’s
more a matter of breaking than of growing taller.”
     “In that case, I won’t try.” My master abandons hope.
     There was still a good deal of the lecture left to deliver and Coldmoon had clearly been
anxious to deal with the question of the physiological function of hanging. But Waverhouse made
so many and such capriciously-phrased interjections and my master yawned so rudely and so
frequently that Coldmoon finally broke off his rehearsal in mid-flow and took his leave. I cannot
tell you what oratorical triumphs he achieved, still less what gestures he employed that evening,
because the lecture took place miles away from me.
     A few days passed uneventfully by. Then, one day about two in the afternoon, Waverhouse
dropped in with his usual casual manners and looking as totally uninhibited as his own concept
of the “Accidental Child.” The minute he sat down he asked abruptly, “Have you heard about
Beauchamp Blowlamp and the Takanawa Incident?” He spoke excitedly, in a tone of voice
appropriate to an announcement of the fall of Port Arthur.
     “No, I haven’t seen him lately.” My master is his usual cheerless self.
     “I’ve come today, although I’m busy, especially to inform you of the frightful blunder which
Beauchamp has committed.”
     “You’re exaggerating again. Indeed you’re quite impossible.”
     “Impossible, never: improbable, perhaps. I must ask you to make a distinction on this point,
for it affects my honor.”
     “It’s the same thing,” replied my master assuming an air of provoking indifference. He is the
very image of a Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man.
     “Last Sunday, Beauchamp went to the Sengaku Temple at Takanawa, which was silly in this
cold weather, especially when to make such a visit nowadays stamps one as a country bumpkin
out to see the sights.”
     “But Beauchamp’s his own master. You’ve no right to stop him going.”
     “True, I haven’t got the right, so let’s not bother about that. The point is that the temple yard
contains a showroom displaying relics of the forty-seven ronin. Do you know it?”
     “N-no.”
     “You don’t? But surely you’ve been to the Temple?”
      “No.”
      “Well, I am surprised. No wonder you so ardently defended Beauchamp. But it’s positively
shameful that a citizen of Tokyo should never have visited the Sengaku Temple.”
      “One can contrive to teach without trailing out to the ends of the city.” My master grows
more and more like his blessed Natural Man.
      “All right. Anyway, Beauchamp was examining the relics when a married couple, Germans
as it happened, entered the showroom. They began by asking him questions in Japanese, but,
as you know, Beauchamp is always aching to practice his German so he naturally responded
by rattling off a few words in that language. Apparently he did it rather well.
      Indeed, when one thinks back over the whole deplorable incident, his very fluency was the
root cause of the trouble.”
      “Well, what happened?” My master finally succumbs.
      “The Germans pointed out a gold-lacquered pill-box which had belonged to Otaka Gengo
and, saying they wished to buy it, asked Beauchamp if the object were for sale. Beauchamp’s
reply was not uninteresting. He said such a purchase would be quite impossible because all
Japanese people were true gentlemen of the sternest integrity. Up to that point he was doing
fine. However, the Germans, thinking that they’d found a useful interpreter, thereupon deluged
him with questions.”
      “About what?”
      “That’s just it. If he had understood their questions, there would have been no trouble. But
you see he was subjected to floods of such questions, all delivered in rapid German, and he
simply couldn’t make head or tail of what was being asked. When at last he chanced to
understand part of their outpourings, it was something about a fireman’s axe or a mallet—some
word he couldn’t translate—so again, naturally, he was completely at a loss how to reply.”
      “That I can well imagine,” sympathizes my master, thinking of his own difficulties as a
teacher.
      “Idle onlookers soon began to gather around and eventually Beauchamp and the Germans
were totally surrounded by staring eyes.
      In his confusion Beauchamp fell to blushing. In contrast to his earlier self-confidence he was
now at his wit’s end.”
      “How did it all turn out?”
      “In the end Beauchamp could stand it no longer, shouted sainara in Japanese and came
rushing home. I pointed out to him that sainara was an odd phrase to use and inquired whether,
in his home-district, people used sainara rather than sayonara. He replied they would say
sayonara but, since he was talking to Europeans, he had used sainara in order to maintain
harmony. I must say I was much impressed to find him a man mindful of harmony even when in
difficulties.”
      “So that’s the bit about sainara. What did the Europeans do?”
      “I hear that the Europeans looked utterly flabbergasted.” And Waverhouse gave vent to
laughter. “Interesting, eh?”
      “Frankly, no. I really can’t find anything particularly interesting in your story. But that you
should have come here specially to tell me the tale, that I do find much more interesting.” My
master taps his cigarette’s ash into the brazier. Just at that moment the bell on the lattice door
at the entrance rang with an alarming loudness, and a piercing woman’s voice declared,
“Excuse me.” Waverhouse and my master look at each other in silence.
     Even while I am thinking that it is unusual for my master’s house to have a female visitor,
the owner of that piercing voice enters the room.
     She is wearing two layers of silk crepe kimono, and looks to be a little over forty. Her
forelock towers up above the bald expanse of her brow like the wall of a dyke and sticks out
toward heaven for easily one half the length of her face. Her eyes, set at an angle like a road
cut through a mountain, slant up symmetrically in straight lines. I speak, of course,
metaphorically. Her eyes, in fact, are even narrower than those of a whale. But her nose is
exceedingly large. It gives the impression that it has been stolen from someone else and
thereafter fastened in the center of her face. It is as if a large, stone lantern from some major
shrine had been moved to a tiny ten-square-meter garden.
     It certainly asserts its own importance, but yet looks out of place. It could almost be
termed hooked: it begins by jutting sharply out, but then, halfway along its length, it suddenly
turns shy so that its tip, bereft of the original vigour, hangs limply down to peer into the mouth
below.
     Her nose is such that, when she speaks, it is the nose rather than the mouth which seems
to be in action. Indeed, in homage to the enormity of that organ, I shall refer hence forward to
its owner as Madam Conk.
     When the ceremonials of her self-introduction had been completed, she glared around the
room and remarked, “What a nice house.”
     “What a liar,” says my master to himself, and concentrates upon his smoking. Waverhouse
studies the ceiling. “Tell me,” he says, “is that odd pattern the result of a rain leak or is it
inherent in the grain of the wood?”
     “Rain leak, naturally” replies my master. To which Waverhouse coolly answers,
“Wonderful.”
     Madam Conk clearly regards them as unsociable persons and boils quietly with suppressed
annoyance. For a time the three of them just sit there in a triangle without saying a word.
     “I’ve come to ask you about a certain matter.” Madam Conk starts up again.
     “Ah.” My master’s response lacks warmth.
     Madam Conk, dissatisfied with this development, bestirs herself again. “I live nearby. In
fact, at the residence on the corner of the block across the road.”
     “That large house in the European style, the one with a godown? Ah, yes. Of course. Have
I not seen ‘Goldfield’ on the nameplate of that dwelling?” My master, at last, seems ready to
take cognizance of Goldfield’s European house and his incorporated godown, but his attitude
toward Madam Conk displays no deepening of respect.
     “Of course my husband should call upon you and seek your valued advice, but he is always
so busy with his company affairs.” She puts on a “that ought to shift them” face, but my master
remains entirely unimpressed. He is, in fact, displeased by her manner of speaking, finding it
too direct in a woman met for the first time. “And not of just one company either. He is
connected with two or three of them and is a director of them all, as I expect you already
know.” She looks as if saying to herself, “Now surely he should feel small.” In point of fact, the
master of this house behaves most humbly toward anyone who happens to be a doctor or a
professor, but, oddly enough, he offers scant respect toward businessmen. He considers a
middle school teacher to be a more elevated person than any businessman. Even if he doesn’t
really believe this, he is quite resigned, being of an unadaptable nature, to the fact that he can
never hope to be smiled upon by businessmen or millionaires.
     For he feels nothing but indifference toward any person, no matter how rich or influential,
from whom he has ceased to hope for benefits. He consequently pays not the faintest attention
to anything extraneous to the society of scholars, and is almost actively disinterested in the
goings-on of the business world. Had he even the vaguest knowledge of the activities of
businessmen, he still could never muster the slightest feeling of awe or respect for such
abysmal persons. While, for her part, Madam Conk could never stretch her imagination to the
point of considering that any being so eccentric as my master could actually exist, that any
corner of the world might harbor such an oddity. Her experience has included meetings with
many people and invariably, as soon as she declares that she is wife to Goldfield, their attitude
towards her never fails immediately to alter. At any party whatsoever and no matter how lofty
the social standing of any man before whom she happens to find herself, she has always found
that Mrs. Goldfield is eminently acceptable. How then could she fail to impress such an obscure
old teacher? She had expected that the mere mention of the fact that her house was the corner
residence of the opposite block would startle my master even before she added information
about Mr. Goldfield’s notable activities in the world of business.
     “Do you know anyone called Goldfield?” my master inquires of Waverhouse with the utmost
nonchalance.
     “Of course I know him. He’s a friend of my uncle. Only the other day he was present at our
garden party.” Waverhouse answers in a serious manner.
     “Really?” said my master. “And who, may I ask, is your uncle?”
     “Baron Makiyama,” replied Waverhouse in even graver tones. My master is obviously about
to say something, but before he can bring himself to words, Madam Conk turns abruptly toward
Waverhouse and subjects him to a piercing stare. Waverhouse, secure in a kimono of the finest
silk, remains entirely unperturbed.
     “Oh, you are Baron Makiyama’s. . . That I didn’t know. I hope you’ll excuse me. . . I’ve
heard so much about Baron Makiyama from my husband. He tells me that the Baron has
always been so helpful. . .” Madam Conk’s manner of speech has suddenly become polite. She
even bows.
     “Ah yes,” observes Waverhouse who is inwardly laughing. My master, quite astonished,
watches the two in silence.
     “I understand he has even troubled the Baron about our daughter’s marriage. . .”
     “Has he indeed?” exclaims Waverhouse as if surprised. Even Waverhouse seems
somewhat taken aback by this unexpected development.
     “We are, in fact, receiving proposal after proposal in respect of marriage to our daughter.
They flood in from all over the place. You will appreciate that, having to think seriously of our
social position, we cannot rashly marry off our daughter to just anyone. . .”
     “Quite so.” Waverhouse feels relieved.
     “I have, in point of fact, made this visit precisely to raise with you a question about this
marriage matter.” Madam Conk turns back to my master and reverts to her earlier vulgar style
of speech. “I hear that a certain Avalon Coldmoon pays you frequent visits. What sort of a man
is he?”
     “Why do you want to know about Coldmoon?” replies my master in a manner revealing his
displeasure.
     “Perhaps it is in connection with your daughter’s marriage that you wish to know something
about the character of Coldmoon,” puts in Waverhouse tactfully.
     “If you could tell me about his character, it would indeed be helpful.”
     “Then is it that you want to give your daughter in marriage to Coldmoon?”
     “It’s not a question of my wanting to give her.” Madam Conk immediately squashes my
master. “Since there will be innumerable proposals, we couldn’t care less if he doesn’t marry
her.”
     “In that case, you don’t need any information about Coldmoon,” my master replies with
matching heat.
     “But you’ve no reason to withhold information.” Madam Conk adopts an almost defiant
attitude.
     Waverhouse, sitting between the two and holding his silver pipe as if it were an umpire’s
instrument of office, is secretly beside himself with glee. His gloating heart urges them on to yet
more extravagant exchanges.
     “Tell me, did Coldmoon actually say he wanted to marry her?” My master fires a broadside
pointblank.
     “He didn’t actually say he wanted to, but. . .”
     “You just think it likely that he might want to?” My master seems to have realized that
broadsides are best in dealing with this woman.
     “The matter is not yet so far advanced, but. . . well, I don’t think Mr.
     Coldmoon is wholly averse to the idea.” Madam Conk rallies well in her extremity.
     “Is there any concrete evidence whatsoever that Coldmoon is enamored of this daughter of
yours?” My master, as if to say, “now answer me if you can,” sticks out his chest belligerently.
     “Well, more or less, yes.” This time my master’s militance has failed in its effect.
Waverhouse has hitherto been so delighted with his self-appointed role of umpire that he has
simply sat and watched the scrap, but now his curiosity seems suddenly to have been aroused.
He puts down the pipe and leans forward. “Has Coldmoon sent your daughter a love letter?
What fun! One more new event since the New Year and, at that, a splendid subject for debate.”
Waverhouse alone is pleased.
     “Not a love letter. Something much more ardent than that. Are you two really so much in the
dark?” Madam Conk adopts a disbelieving attitude.
     “Are you aware of anything?” My master, looking nonplussed, addresses himself to
Waverhouse.
     Waverhouse takes refuge in banter. “I know nothing. If anyone should know, it would be
you.” His reaction is disappointingly modest.
     “But the two of you know all about it,” Madam Conk triumphs over both of them.
     “Oh!”The sound expressed their simultaneous astonishment.
     “In case you’ve forgotten, let me remind you of what happened. At the end of last year Mr.
Coldmoon went to a concert at the Abe residence in Mukōjima, right? That evening, on his way
home, something happened at Azuma Bridge. You remember? l won’t repeat the details since
that might compromise the person in question, but what I’ve said is surely proof enough. What
do you think?” She sits bolt-upright with her diamond-ringed fingers in her lap. Her magnificent
nose looks more resplendent than ever, so much so that Waverhouse and my master seem
practically obliterated.
     My master, naturally, but Waverhouse also, appear dumbfounded by this surprise attack.
For a while they just sit there in bewilderment, like patients whose fits of ague have suddenly
ceased. But as the first shock of their astonishment subsides and they come slowly back to
normality, their sense of humor irrepressibly asserts itself and they burst into gales of laughter.
Madam Conk, baulked in her expectations and, ill-prepared for this reaction of rude laughing,
glares at both of them.
     “Was that your daughter? Isn’t it wonderful! You’re quite right.
     Indeed Coldmoon must be mad about her. I say, Sneaze, there’s no point now in trying to
keep it secret. Let’s make a clean breast of everything.”
     My master just says “Hum.”
     “There’s certainly no point in your trying to keep it secret. The cat’s already out of the bag.”
Madam Conk is once more cock-a-hoop.
     “Yes, indeed, we’re cornered. We’ll have to make a true statement on everything
concerning Coldmoon for this lady’s information. Sneaze! you’re the host here. Pull yourself
together, man. Stop grinning like that or we’ll never get this business sorted out. It’s
extraordinary.
     Secretiveness is a most mysterious matter. However well one guards a secret, sooner or
later it’s bound to come out. Indeed, when you come to think of it, it really is most
extraordinary. Tell us, Mrs. Goldfield, how did you ever discover this secret? I am truly
amazed.” Waverhouse rattles on.
     “I’ve a nose for these things.” Madam Conk declares with some self-satisfaction.
     “You must indeed be very well informed. Who on earth has told you about this matter?”
     “The wife of the rickshawman who lives just there at the back.”
     “Do you mean that man who owns that vile black cat?” My master is wide-eyed.
     “Yes, your Mr. Coldmoon has cost me a pretty penny. Every time he comes here I want to
know what he talks about, so I’ve arranged for the wife of the rickshawman to learn what
happens and to report it all to me.”
     “But that’s terrible!” My master raises his voice.
     “Don’t worry, I don’t give a damn what you do or say. I’m not in the least concerned with
you, only with Mr. Coldmoon.”
     “Whether with Coldmoon or with anyone else. . . Really, that rickshaw woman is a quite
disgusting creature.” My master begins to get angry.
     “But surely she is free to stand outside your hedge. If you don’t want your conversations
overheard, you should either talk less loudly or live in a larger house.” Madam Conk is clearly
not the least ashamed of herself. “And that’s not my only source. I’ve also heard a deal of stuff
from the Mistress of the two-stringed harp.”
     “You mean about Coldmoon?”
     “Not solely about Coldmoon.” This sounds menacing but, far from retreating in
embarrassment, my master retorts. “That woman gives herself such airs. Acting as though she
and she alone were the only person of any standing in this neighborhood. A vain, an idiotic
fellow. . .”
     “Pardon me! It’s a woman you’re describing. A fellow, did you say?
     Believe me, you’re talking out of the back of your neck.” Her language more and more
betrays her vulgar origin. Indeed, it now appears as if she has only come in order to pick a
quarrel. But Waverhouse, typically, just sits listening to the quarrel as if it were being conducted
for his amusement. Indeed, he looks like a Chinese sage at a cockfight: cool and above it all.
     My master at last realizes that he can never match Madam Conk in the exchange of
scurrilities, and he lapses into a forced silence. But eventually a bright idea occurs to him.
      “You’ve been speaking as though it were Coldmoon who was besotted with your daughter,
but from what I’ve heard, the situation is quite different. Isn’t that so,Waverhouse?”
      “Certainly. As we heard it, your daughter fell ill and then, we understand, began babbling in
delirium.”
      “No. You’ve got it all wrong.” Madam Conk gives the lie direct.
      “But Coldmoon undoubtedly said that that was what he had been told by Dr. O’s wife.”
      “That was our trap. We’d asked the Doctor’s wife to play that trick on Coldmoon precisely
in order to see how he’d react.”
      “Did the doctor’s wife agree to this deception in full knowledge that it was a trick?”
      “Yes. Of course we couldn’t expect her to help us purely for affection’s sake. As I’ve said,
we’ve had to lay out a very pretty penny on one thing and another.”
      “You are quite determined to impose yourself upon us and quiz us in detail about Coldmoon,
eh?” Even Waverhouse seems to be getting annoyed for he uses some sharpish turns of
phrase quite unlike his usual manner.
      “Ah well, Sneaze,” he continues, “what do we lose if we talk? Let’s tell her everything. Now,
Mrs. Goldfield, both Sneaze and I will tell you anything within reason about Coldmoon. But it
would be more convenient for us if you’d present your questions one at a time.”
      Madam Conk was thus at last brought to see reason. And when she began to pose her
questions, her style of speech, only recently so coarsely violent, acquired a certain civil polish,
at least when she spoke to Waverhouse. “I understand,” she opens, “that Mr. Coldmoon is a
bachelor of science. Now please tell me in what sort of subject has he specialized?”
      “In his post-graduate course, he’s studying terrestrial magnetism,” answers my master
seriously.
      Unfortunately, Madam Conk does not understand this answer.
      Therefore, though she says, “Ah,” she looks dubious and asks: “If one studies that, could
one obtain a doctor’s degree?”
      “Are you seriously suggesting that you wouldn’t allow your daughter to marry him unless he
held a doctorate?” The tone of my master’s inquiry discloses his deep displeasure.
      “That’s right. After all, if it’s just a bachelor’s degree, there are so many of them!” Madam
Conk replies with complete unconcern.
      My master’s glance at Waverhouse reveals a deepening disgust.
      “Since we cannot be sure whether or not he’ll gain a doctorate, you’ll have to ask us
something else.”Waverhouse seems equally displeased.
      “Is he still just studying that terrestrial something?”
      “A few days ago,” my master quite innocently offers, “he made a speech on the results of
his investigation of the mechanics of hanging.”
      “Hanging? How dreadful! He must be peculiar. I don’t suppose he could ever become a
doctor by devoting himself to hanging.”
      “It would of course be difficult for him to gain a doctorate if he actually hanged himself, but
it is not impossible to become a doctor through study of the mechanics of hanging.”
      “Is that so?” she answers, trying to read my master’s expression. It’s a sad, sad thing but,
since she does not know what mechanics are, she cannot help feeling uneasy. She probably
thinks that to ask the meaning of such a trifling matter might involve her in loss of face. Like a
fortuneteller, she tries to guess the truth from facial expressions. My master’s face is glum. “Is
he studying anything else, something more easy to understand?”
    “He once wrote a treatise entitled ‘A Discussion of the Stability of Acorns in Relation to the
Movements of Heavenly Bodies.’”
    “Does one really study such things as acorns at a university?”
    “Not being a member of any university, I cannot answer your question with complete
certainty, but since Coldmoon is engaged in such studies, the subject must undoubtedly be
worth studying.” With a dead-pan face,Waverhouse makes fun of her.
    Madam Conk seems to have realized that her questions about matters of scholarship have
carried her out of her depth, for she changes the subject. “By the way,” she says, “I hear that
he broke two of his front teeth when eating mushrooms during the New Year season.”
    “True, and a rice-cake became fixed on the broken part.”
    Waverhouse, feeling that this question is indeed up his street, suddenly becomes light-
hearted.
    “How unromantic! I wonder why he doesn’t use a toothpick!”
    “Next time I see him, I’ll pass on your sage advice,” says my master with a chuckle.
    “If his teeth can be snapped on mushrooms, they must be in very poor condition. What do
you think?”
    “One could hardly say such teeth were good. Could one, Waverhouse?”
    “Of course they can’t be good, but they do provide a certain humor.
    It’s odd that he hasn’t had them filled. It really is an extraordinary sight when a man just
leaves his teeth to become mere hooks for snagging rice-cakes.”
    “Is it because he lacks the money to get them filled or because he’s just so odd that he
leaves them unattended to?”
    “Ah, you needn’t worry. I don’t suppose he will continue as Mr.
    Broken Front Tooth for any long time.” Waverhouse is evidently regaining his usual
bouyancy.
    Madam Conk again changes the subject. “If you should have some letter or anything which
he’s written, I’d like to see it.”
    “I have masses of postcards from him. Please have a look at them,” and my master
produces some thirty or forty postcards from his study.
    “Oh, I don’t have to look at so many of them. . . perhaps two or three would do. . .”
    “Let me choose some for you,” offers Waverhouse, adding as he selects a picture
postcard, “Here’s an interesting one.”
    “Gracious! So he paints pictures as well? Rather clever that,” she exclaims. But after
examining the picture she remarks “How very silly!
    It’s a badger! Why on earth does he have to paint a badger of all things!
    Strange. But it does indeed look like a badger.” She is, albeit reluctantly, mildly impressed.
    “Read what he’s written beside it,” suggests my master with a laugh.
    Madam Conk begins to read aloud like a servant-girl deciphering a newspaper.
    “On New Year’s Eve, as calculated under the ancient calendar, the mountain badgers hold
a garden party at which they dance excessively.
    Their song says, ‘This evening, being New Year’s Eve, no mountain hikers will come this
way.’ And bom-bom-bom they thump upon their bellies. What is he writing about? Is he not
being a trifle frivolous?” Madam Conk seems seriously dissatisfied.
    “Doesn’t this heavenly maiden please you?” Waverhouse picks out another card on which a
kind of angel in celestial raiment is depicted as playing upon a lute.
     “The nose of this heavenly maiden seems rather too small.”
     “Oh no, that’s about the average size for an angel. But forget the nose for the moment and
read what it says,” urges Waverhouse.
     “It says ‘Once upon a time there was an astronomer. One night he went as was his wont
high up into his observatory, and, as he was intently watching the stars, a beautiful heavenly
maiden appeared in the sky and began to play some music; music too delicate ever to be heard
on earth. The astronomer was so entranced by the music that he quite forgot the dark night’s
bitter cold. Next morning the dead body of the astronomer was found covered with pure white
frost. An old man, a liar, told me that this story was all true.’ What the hell is this? It makes no
sense, no nothing. Can Coldmoon really be a bachelor of science?
     Perhaps he should read a few literary magazines.”Thus mercilessly does Madam Conk
lambaste the defenseless Coldmoon.
     Waverhouse for fun selects a third postcard and says, “Well then, what about this one?”
The card has a sailing boat printed on it and, as usual, there is something scribbled underneath
the picture.



    Last night a tiny whore of sixteen summers
    Declared she had no parents.
    Like a plover on a reefy coast,
    She wept on waking in the early morning.
    Her parents, sailors both, lie at the bottom of the sea.



     “Oh, that’s good. How very clever! He’s got real feeling,” erupted Madam Conk.
     “Feeling?” says Waverhouse.
     “Oh yes,” says Madam Conk. “That would go well on a samisen.
     “If it could be played on the samisen, then it’s the real McCoy. Well, how about these?”
asks Waverhouse picking out postcard after postcard.
     “Thank you, but I’ve seen enough. For now, at least I know that Coldmoon’s not a straight-
laced prude.” She thinks she has achieved some real understanding and appears to have no
more queries about Coldmoon, for she remarks, “I’m sorry to have troubled you. Please do not
report my visit to Mr. Coldmoon.” Her request reflects her selfish nature in that she seems to
feel entitled to make a thorough investigation of Coldmoon whilst expecting that none of her
activities should be revealed to him. Both Waverhouse and my master concede a half-hearted
“Y-es,” but as Madam Conk gets up to leave, she consolidates their assent by saying, “I shall,
of course, at some later date repay you for your services.”
     The two men showed her out and, as they resumed their seats, Waverhouse exclaimed,
“What on earth is that?” At the very same moment my master also ejaculated, “Whatever’s
that?” I suppose my master’s wife could not restrain her laughter any longer, for we heard her
gurgling in the inner-room.
     Waverhouse thereupon addressed her in a loud voice through the sliding door. “That, Mrs.
Sneaze, was a remarkable specimen of all that is conventional, of all that is ‘common or
garden.’ But when such characteristics become developed to that incredible degree the result is
positively staggering. Such quintessence of the common approximates to the unique. Don’t seek
to restrain yourself. Laugh to your heart’s content.”
     With evident disgust my master speaks in tones of the deepest revulsion. “To begin with,”
he says, “her face is unattractive.”
     Waverhouse immediately takes the cue. “And that nose, squatting, as it were, in the middle
of that phiz, seems affectedly unreal.”
     “Not only that, it’s crooked.”
     “Hunchbacked, one might say. A hunchbacked nose! Quite extraordinary.” And Waverhouse
laughs in genuine delight.
     “It is the face of a woman who keeps her husband under her bottom.”
     My master still looks resentful.
     “It is a sort of physiognomy that, left unsold in the nineteenth century, becomes in the
twentieth shop-soiled.”Waverhouse produces another of his invariably bizarre remarks. At which
juncture my master’s wife emerges from the inner-room and, being a woman and thus aware of
the ways of women, quietly warns them, “If you talk such scandal, the rickshaw-owner’s wife
will snitch on you again.”
     “But, Mrs. Sneaze, to hear such tattle will do that Goldfield woman no end of good.”
     “But it’s self-demeaning to calumniate a person’s face. No one sports that sort of nose as a
matter of choice. Besides, she is a woman. You’re going a little too far.” Her defense of the
nose of Madam Conk is simultaneously an indirect defense of her own indifferent looks.
     “We’re not unkind at all. That creature isn’t a woman. She’s just an oaf. Waverhouse, am I
not right?”
     “Maybe an oaf, but a formidable character nonetheless. She gave you quite a tousling,
didn’t she just?”
     “What does she take a teacher for, anyway?”
     “She ranks a teacher on roughly the same level as a rickshaw-owner.
     To earn the respect of such viragoes one needs to have at least a doctor’s degree. You
were ill-advised not to have taken your doctorate. Don’t you agree, Mrs. Sneaze?”Waverhouse
looks at her with a smile.
     “A doctorate? Quite impossible.” Even his wife despairs of my master.
     “You never know. I might become one, one of these days. You mustn’t always doubt my
worth. You may well be ignorant of the fact, but in ancient times a certain Greek, lsocrates,
produced major literary works at the age of ninety-four. Similarly, Sophocles was almost a
centenarian when he shook the world with his masterpiece. Simonides was writing wonderful
poetry in his eighties. I, too. . .”
     “Don’t be silly. How can you possibly expect, you with your stomach troubles, to live that
long.” Mrs. Sneaze has already determined my master’s span of life.
     “How dare you! Just go and talk to Dr. Amaki. Anyway, it’s all your fault. It’s because you
make me wear this crumpled black cotton surcoat and this patched-up kimono that I am
despised by women like Mrs.
     Goldfield.Very well then. From tomorrow I shall rig myself out in such fineries as
Waverhouse is wearing. So get them ready.”
     “You may well say ‘get them ready,’ but we don’t possess any such elegant clothes.
Anyway, Mrs. Goldfield only grew civil to Waverhouse after he’d mentioned his uncle’s name.
Her attitude was in no way conditioned by the ill-condition of your kimono.” Mrs. Sneaze has
neatly dodged the charge against her.
     The mention of that uncle appears to trigger my master’s memory, for he turns to
Waverhouse and says, “That was the first I ever heard of your uncle. You never spoke of him
before. Does he, in fact, exist?”
     Waverhouse has obviously been expecting this question, and he jumps to answer it. “Yes,
that uncle of mine, a remarkably stubborn man. He, too, is a survival from the nineteenth
century.” He looks at husband and wife.
     “You do say the quaintest things. Where does this uncle live?” asks Mr.
     Sneaze with a titter.
     “In Shizuoka. But he doesn’t just live. He lives with a top-knot still on his head. Can you beat
it? When we suggest he should wear a hat, he proudly answers that he has never found the
weather cold enough to don such gear. And when we hint that he might be wise to stay abed
when the weather’s freezing, he replies that four hour’s sleep is sufficient for any man. He is
convinced that to sleep more than four hours is sheer extravagance, so he gets up while it’s still
pitch-dark. It is his boast that it took many long years of training so to minimize his sleeping
hours. ‘When I was young,’ he says,‘it was indeed hard because I felt sleepy, but recently I
have at last achieved that wonderful condition where I can sleep or wake, anywhere, anytime,
just as I happen to wish.’ It is of course natural that a man of sixty-seven should need less
sleep. It has nothing to do with early training, but my uncle is happy in the belief that he has
succeeded in attaining his present condition entirely as a result of rigorous self-discipline. And
when he goes out, he always carries an iron fan.”
     “Whatever for?” asks my master.
     “l haven’t the faintest idea. He just carries it. Perhaps he prefers a fan to a walking stick.
As a matter of fact an odd thing happened only the other day.”Waverhouse speaks to Mrs.
Sneaze.
     “Ah yes?” she noncommittally responds.
     “In the spring this year he wrote to me out of the blue with a request that I should send him
a bowler hat and a frock-coat. I was somewhat surprised and wrote back asking for further
clarification. I received an answer stating that the old man himself intended to wear both items
on the occasion of the Shizuoka celebration of the war victory, and that I should therefore send
them quickly. It was an order. But the quaintness of his letter was that it enjoined me ‘to choose
a hat of suitable size and, as for the suit, to go and order one from Daimaru of whatever size
you think appropriate.’”
     “Can one get suits made at Daimaru?”
     “No. I think he’d got confused and meant to say at Shirokiya’s.”
     “Isn’t it a little unhelpful to say ‘of whatever size you think appropriate’?”
     “That’s just my uncle all over.”
     “What did you do?”
     “What could I do? I ordered a suit which I thought appropriate and sent it to him.”
     “How very irresponsible! And did it fit?”
     “More or less, I think. For I later noticed in my home-town newspaper that the venerable
Mr. Makiyama had created something of a sensation by appearing at the said celebration in a
frock coat carrying, as usual, his famous iron fan.”
     “It seems difficult to part him from that object.”
     “When he’s buried, I shall ensure that the fan is placed within the coffin.”
     “Still it was fortunate that the coat and bowler fitted him.”
     “But they didn’t. Just when I was congratulating myself that everything had gone off
smoothly, a parcel came from Shizuoka. I opened it expecting some token of his gratitude, but
it proved only to contain the bowler. An accompanying letter stated, ‘Though you have taken the
trouble of making this purchase for me, I find the hat too large. Please be so kind as to take it
back to the hatter’s and have it shrunk. I will of course defray your consequent expenses by
postal order.’”
     “Peculiar, one must admit.” My master seems greatly pleased to discover that there is
someone even more peculiar than himself. “So what did you do?” he asks.
     “What did I do? I could do nothing. I’m wearing the hat myself.”
     “And is that the very hat?” says my master with a smirk.
     “And he’s a Baron?” asks my master’s wife from her mystification.
     “Is who?”
     “Your uncle with the iron fan.”
     “Oh, no. He’s a scholar of the Chinese classics. When he was young he studied at that
shrine dedicated to Confucius in Yushima and became so absorbed in the teachings of Chu-Tzu
that, most reverentially, he continues to wear a top-knot in these days of the electric light.
There’s nothing one can do about it.” Waverhouse rubs his chin.
     “But I have the impression that in speaking just now to that awful woman you mentioned a
Baron Makiyama.”
     “Indeed you did. I heard you quite distinctly, even in the other room.”
     Mrs. Sneaze for once supports her husband.
     “Oh, did I?” Waverhouse permits himself a snigger. “Fancy that. Well, it wasn’t true. Had I a
Baron for an uncle I would by now be a senior civil servant.”Waverhouse is not in the least
embarrassed.
     “I thought it was somehow queer,” says my master with an expression half-pleased, half-
worried.
     “It’s astonishing how calmly you can lie. I must say you’re a past master at the game.” Mrs.
Sneaze is deeply impressed.
     “You flatter me. That woman quite outclasses me.”
     “I don’t think she could match you.”
     “But, Mrs. Sneaze, my lies are merely tarrydiddles. That woman’s lies, every one of them,
have hooks inside them. They’re tricky lies. Lies loaded with malice aforethought. They are the
spawn of craftiness.
     Please never confuse such calculated monkey-minded wickedness with my heaven-sent
taste for the comicality of things. Should such confusion prevail, the God of Comedy would have
no choice but to weep for mankind’s lack of perspicacity.”
     “I wonder,” says my master, lowering his eyes, while Mrs. Sneaze, still laughing, remarks
that it all comes down to the same thing in the end.
     Up until now I have never so much as crossed the road to investigate the block opposite. I
have never clapped eyes on the Goldfield’s corner residence so I naturally have no idea what it
looks like. Indeed today is the first time that I’ve even heard of its existence. No one in this
house has ever previously talked about a businessman and consequently I, who am my
master’s cat, have shared his total disinterest in the world of business and his equally total
indifference to businessmen. However, having just been present during the colloquy with
Madam Conk, having overheard her talk, having imagined her daughter’s beauty and charm,
and also having given some thought to that family’s wealth and power, I have come to realize
that, though no more than a cat, I should not idle all my days away lying on the veranda. Nor
only that, I cannot help but feel deep sympathy with Coldmoon. His opponent has already
bribed a doctor’s wife, bribed the wife of the rickshaw-owner, bribed even that high-falutin
mistress of the two-stringed harp. She has so spied upon poor Coldmoon that even his broken
teeth have been disclosed, while he has done no more than fiddle with the fastenings of his
surcoat and, on occasion, grin. He is guileless even for a bachelor of science just out of the
university. And it’s not just anyone who can cope with a woman equipped with such a jut of
nose. My master not only lacks the heart for dealing with matters of this sort, but he lacks the
money, too.
     Waverhouse has sufficient money, but is such an inconsequential being that he’d never go
out of his way merely to help Coldmoon. How isolated, then, is that unfortunate person who
lectures on the mechanics of hanging. It would be less than fair if I failed at least to try and
insinuate myself into the enemy fortress and, for Coldmoon’s sake, pick up news of their
activities. Though but a cat, I am not quite as other cats. I differ from the general run of idiot
cats and stupid cats. I am a cat that lodges in the house of a scholar who, having read it, can
bang down any book by Epictetus on his desk. Concentrated in the tip of my tail there is
sufficient of the spirit of chivalry for me to take it upon myself to venture upon knight-errantry. It
is not that I am in any way beholden to poor Coldmoon, nor am I engaging in foolhardy action
for the sake of any single individual. If I may be allowed to blow my own trumpet, I am
proposing to take magnificent unself-interested action simply in order to realize the will of
Heaven that smiles upon impartiality and blesses the happy medium. Since Madam Conk
makes impermissible use of such things as the happenings at Azuma Bridge; since she hires
underlings to spy and eavesdrop on us; since she triumphantly retails to all and sundry the
products of her espionage; since by the employment of rickshaw-folk, mere grooms, plain
rogues, student riff-raff, crone daily-help, midwives, witches, masseurs, and other trouble-
makers she seeks to trouble a man of talent; for all these reasons even a cat must do what can
be done to prevent her getting away with it.
     The weather, fortunately, is fine. The thaw is something of nuisance, but one must be
prepared to sacrifice one’s life in the cause of justice. If my feet get muddy and stamp plum
blossom patterns on the veranda, OSan may be narked but that won’t worry me. For I have
come to the superlatively courageous, firm decision that I will not put off until tomorrow what
needs to be done today. Accordingly, I whisk off around to the kitchen, but, having arrived
there, pause for further thought.
     “Softly, softly,” I say to myself. It’s not simply that I’ve attained the highest degree of
evolution that can occur in cats, but I make bold to believe my brain is as well-developed as
that of any boy in his third year at a middle school. Nevertheless, alas, the construction of my
throat is still only that of a cat, and I cannot therefore speak the babbles of mankind. Thus,
even if I succeed in sneaking into the Goldfield’s citadel and there discovering matters of
moment, I shall remain unable to communicate my discoveries to that Coldmoon who so needs
them. Neither shall I be able to communicate my gleanings to my master or to Waverhouse.
Such incommunicable knowledge would, like a buried diamond, be denied its brilliance and my
hard-won wisdom would all be won for nothing.
     Which would be stupid. Perhaps I should scrap my plan. So thinking, I hesitated on the very
doorstep.
     But to abandon a project halfway through breeds a kind of regret, that sense of unfulfillment
which one feels when the slower one had so confidently expected drifts away under inky clouds
into some other part of the countryside. Of course, to persist when one is in the wrong is an
altogether different matter, but to press on for the sake of so-called justice and humanity, even
at the risk of death uncrowned by success, that, for a man who knows his duty, can be a
source of the deepest satisfaction. Accordingly, to engage in fruitless effort and to muddy one’s
paws on a fool’s errand would seem about right for a cat. Since it is my misfortune to have
been born a cat, I cannot by turns of the tip of my tail convey, as I can to cats, my thinking to
such scholars as Coldmoon, Sneaze, and Waverhouse. However, by virtue of felinity, I can,
better than all such bookmen, make myself invisible. To do what no one else can do is, of itself,
delightful. That I alone should know the inner workings of the Goldfield household is better than
if nobody should know.
     Though I cannot pass my knowledge on, it is still cause for delight that I may make the
Goldfields conscious that someone knows their secrets.
     In the light of this succession of delights, I boldly make to believe my brain is as delightful
as well. All right then. I will go.
     Coming to the side street in the opposite block, there, sure enough, I find a Western-style
house dominating the crossroads as if it owned the whole area. Thinking that the master of
such a house must be no less stuck up than his building, I slide past the gate and examine the
edifice. Its construction has no merit. Its two stories rear up into the air for no purpose
whatever but to impress, even to coerce, the passersby. This, I suppose, is what Waverhouse
means when he calls things common or garden. I slink through some bushes, take note of the
main entrance to my right, and so find my way round to the kitchen. As might be expected, the
kitchen is large—at least ten times as large as that in my master’s dwelling.
     Everything is in such apple pie order, all so clean and shining, that it cannot be less splendid
than that fabulous kitchen of Count Okuma so ful-somely described in a recent product of the
national press. I tell myself, as I slip inside on silent muddy paws, that this must be “a model
kitchen.”
     On the plastered part of its floor the wife of the rickshaw-owner is standing in earnest
discussion with a kitchen-maid and a rickshaw-runner.
     Realizing the dangers of this situation, I hide behind a water-tub.
     “That teacher, doesn’t he really even know our master’s name?” the kitchen-maid demands.
     “Of course he knows it. Anyone in this district who doesn’t know the Goldfield residence
must be a deaf cripple without eyes,” snaps the man who pulls the Goldfield’s private rickshaw.
     “Well, you never know. That teacher’s one of those cranks who know nothing at all except
what it says in books. If he knew even the least little thing about Mr. Goldfield he might be
scared out of his wits. But he hasn’t the wits to be scared out of. Why,” snorts Blacky’s bloody-
minded mistress, “he doesn’t even know the ages of his own mis-managed children.”
     “So he’s not afraid of our Mr. Goldfield! What a cussed clot he is!
     There’s no call to show him the least consideration. Let’s go around and give him something
to be scared about.”
     “Good idea! He says such dreadful things. He was telling his crackpot cronies that, since
Madam’s nose is far too big for her face, he finds her unattractive. No doubt he thinks himself a
proper picture, but his mug’s the spitting image of a terra-cotta badger. What can be done, I
ask you, with such an animal?”
     “And it isn’t only his face. The way he saunters down to the public bathhouse carrying a
hand towel is far too high and mighty. He thinks he’s the cat’s whiskers.” My master Sneaze
seems notably unpopular, even with this kitchen-maid.
     “Let’s all go and call him names as loud as we can from just outside his hedge.”
     “That’ll bring him down a peg.”
     “But we mustn’t let ourselves be seen. We must spoil his studying just with shouting, getting
him riled as much as we can. Those are Madam’s latest orders.”
     “I know all that,” says the rickshaw wife in a voice that makes it clear that she’s only too
ready to undertake one-third of their scurrilous assignment. Thinking to myself, “So that’s the
gang who’re going to ridicule my master,” I drift quietly past the noisesome trio and penetrate
yet further into the enemy fortress.
     Cat’s paws are as if they do not exist. Wheresoever they may go, they never make clumsy
noises. Cats walk as if on air, as if they trod the clouds, as quietly as a stone going light-tapped
under water, as an ancient Chinese harp touched in a sunken cave. The walking of a cat is the
instinctive realization of all that is most delicate. For such as I am concerned, this vulgar
Western house simply is not there. Nor do I take cognizance of the rickshaw-woman,
manservant, kitchen-maids, the daughter of the house, Madam Conk, her parlor-maids or even
her ghastly husband. For me they do not exist. I go where I like and I listen to whatever talk it
interests me to hear. Thereafter, sticking out my tongue and frisking my tail, I walk home self-
composedly with my whiskers proudly stiff. In this particular field of endeavor there’s not a cat
in all Japan so gifted as am I. Indeed, I sometimes think I really must be blood-kin to that
monster cat one sees in ancient picture books. They say that every toad carries in its forehead
a gem that in the darkness utters light, but packed within my tail I carry not only the power of
God, Buddha, Confucius, Love, and even Death, but also an infallible panacea for all ills that
could bewitch the entire human race. I can as easily move unnoticed through the corridors of
Goldfield’s awful mansion as a giant god of stone could squash a milk-blancmange.
     At this point, I become so impressed by my own powers and so conscious of the reverence
I consequently owe to my own most precious tail that I feel unable to withhold immediate
recognition of its divinity. I desire to pray for success in war by worshiping my honored Great
Tail Gracious Deity, so I lower my head a little, only to find I am not facing in the right direction.
When I make the three appropriate obeisances I should, of course, as far as it is possible, be
facing toward my tail. But as I turn my body to fulfill that requirement, my tail moves away from
me.
     In an effort to catch up with myself, I twist my neck. But still my tail eludes me. Being a
thing so sacred, containing as it does the entire universe in its three-inch length, my tail is
inevitably beyond my power to control. I spun round in pursuit of it seven and a half times but,
feeling quite exhausted, I finally gave up. I feel a trifle giddy. For a moment I lose all sense of
where I am and, deciding that my whereabouts are totally unimportant, I start to walk about at
random. Then I hear the voice of Madam Conk. It comes from the far side of a paper-window.
My ears prick up in sharp diagonals and, once more fully alert, I hold my breath.
     This is the place which I set out to find.
     “He’s far too cocky for a penny-pinching usher,” she’s screaming in that parrot’s voice.
     “Sure, he’s a cocky fellow. I’ll have a bit of the bounce taken out of him, just to teach him a
lesson. There are one or two fellows I know, fellows from my own province, teaching at his
school.”
      “What fellows are those?”
      “Well, there’s Tsuki Pinsuke and Fukuchi Kishago for a start. I’ll arrange with them for him
to be ragged in class.”
      I don’t know from what province old man Goldfield comes, but I’m rather surprised to find it
stiff with such outlandish names.
      “Is he a teacher of English?” her husband asks.
      “Yes. According to the wife of the rickshaw-owner, his teaching specializes in an English
Reader or something like that.”
      “In any case, he’s gotta be a rotten teacher.”
      I’m also struck by the vulgarity of that “gotta be” phraseology.
      “When I saw Pinsuke the other day he mentioned that there was some crackpot at his
school. When asked the English word for bancha, this fathead answered that the English called
it, not ‘coarse tea’ as they actually do, but ‘savage tea.’ He’s now the laughing stock of all his
teaching colleagues. Pinsuke added that all the other teachers suffer for this one’s follies.Very
likely it’s the self-same loon.”
      “It’s bound to be. He’s got the face you’d expect on a fool who thinks that tea can be
savage. And to think he has the nerve to sport such a dashing mustache!”
      “Saucy bastard.”
      If whiskers establish sauciness, every cat is impudent.
      “As for that man Waverhouse—Staggering Drunk I’d call him—he’s an obstreperous freak if
ever I saw one. Baron Makiyama, his uncle indeed! I was sure that no one with a face like his
could have a baron for an uncle.”
      “You, too, are at fault for believing anything which a man of such dubious origins might say.”
      “Maybe I was at fault. But really there’s a limit and he’s gone much too far.” Madam Conk
sounds singularly vexed. The odd thing is that neither mentions Coldmoon. I wonder if they
concluded their discussion about him before I sneaked up on them or whether perhaps they had
earlier decided to block his marriage suit and had therefore already forgotten all about him. I
remain disturbed about this question, but there’s nothing I can do about it. For a little while I lay
crouched down in silence but then I heard a bell ring at the far end of the corridor. What’s up
down there? Determined this time not to be late on the scene, I set out smartly in the direction
of the sound.
      I arrived to find some female yattering away by herself in a loud unpleasant voice. Since
her tones resemble those of Madam Conk, I deduce that this must be that darling daughter,
that delicious charmer for whose sake Coldmoon has already risked death by drowning.
      Unfortunately, the paper-windows between us make it impossible for me to observe her
beauty and I cannot therefore be sure whether she, too, has a massive nose plonked down in
the center of her face. But I infer from her mannerisms, such as the way she sounds to be
turning up her nose when she talks, that that organ is unlikely to be an inconspicuous pug-nose.
Though she talks continuously, nobody seems to be answering, and I deduce that she must be
using one of those modern telephones.
      “Is that the Yamato? I want to reserve, for tomorrow, the third box in the lower gallery. All
right? Got it? What’s that? You can’t? But you must.
      Why should I be joking? Don’t be such a fool. Who the devil are you?
      Chōkichi? Well, Chōkichi, you’re not doing very well. Ask the proprietress to come to the
phone. What’s that? Did you say you were able to cope with any possible inquiries? How dare
you speak to me like that?
      D’you know who I am? This is Miss Goldfield speaking. Oh, you’re well aware of that, are
you? You really are a fathead. Don’t you understand, this is the Goldfield. Again? You thank us
for being regular patrons? I don’t want your stupid thanks. I want the third box in the lower
gallery.
      Don’t laugh, you idiot. You must be terribly stupid. You are, you say? If you don’t stop being
insolent, I shall just ring off. You understand? I can promise you you’ll be sorry. Hello. Are you
still there? Hello, hello.
      Speak up. Answer me. Hello, hello, hello.” Chōkichi seems to have hung up, for no answer
is forthcoming. The girl is now in something of a tizzy and she grinds away at the telephone
handle as though she’s gone off her head. A lapdog somewhere around her feet suddenly starts
to yap, and, realizing I’d better keep my wits about me, I quickly hop off the veranda and creep
in under the house.
      Just then I hear approaching footsteps and the sound of a paper-door being slid aside. I tilt
my head to listen.
      “Your father and mother are asking for you, Miss.” It sounds like a parlor-maid.
      “So who cares?” was the vulgar answer.
      “They sent me to fetch you because they’ve something they want to tell you.”
      “You’re being a nuisance. I said I just don’t care.” She snubs the maid once more.
      “They said it’s something to do with Mr. Coldmoon.” The maid tries tactfully to put this
young vixen into a better humor.
      “I couldn’t care less if they want to talk about Coldmoon or Piddlemoon. I abominate that
man with his daft face looking like a bewildered gourd.” Her third sour outburst is directed at
the absent Coldmoon. “Hello,” she suddenly goes on, “when did you start dressing your hair in
the Western style?”
      The parlor-maid gulps and then replies as briefly as she can “Today.”
      “What sauce. A mere parlor-maid, what’s more.” Her fourth attack comes in from a
different direction. “And isn’t that a brand new collar you’ve got on?”
      “Yes, it’s the one you gave me recently. I’ve been keeping it in my box because it seemed
too good for the likes of me, but my other collar became so grubby I thought I’d make the
change.”
      “When did I give it you?”
      “It was January you bought it. At Shirokiya’s. It’s got the ranks of sumō wrestlers set out as
decoration on the greeny-brown material. You said it was too somber for your style. So you
gave it me.”
      “Did I? Well, it certainly looks nice on you. How very provoking!”
      “I’m much obliged!”
      “I didn’t intend a compliment. I’m very much put out.”
      “Yes, Miss.”
      “Why did you accept something which so very much becomes you without letting me know
that it would?”
      “But Miss. . .”
      “Since it looks that nice on you, it couldn’t fail, could it, to look more nice on me?”
      “I’m sure it would have looked delightful on you.”
     “Then why didn’t you say so? Instead of that, you just stand there wearing it when you
know I’d like it back. You little beast.” Her vituperations seem to have no end. I was wondering
what would happen when, from the room at the other end of the house, old man Goldfield
himself suddenly roared out for his daughter. “Opula,” he bellowed.
     “Opula, come here.” She had no choice but to obey and mooched sulkily out of the room
containing the telephone. Her lapdog, slightly bigger than myself with its eyes and mouth all
bunched together in the middle of its revolting mug, slopped along behind her.
     Thereupon, with my usual stealthy steps, I tiptoed back to the kitchen and, through the
kitchen-door, found my way to the street, and so back home. My expedition has been notably
successful.
     Coming thus suddenly from a beautiful mansion to our dirty little dwelling, I felt as though I
had descended from a sunlit mountaintop to some dark dismal grot. Whilst on my spying
mission. I’d been far too busy to take any notice of the ornaments in the rooms, of the
decoration of the sliding-doors and paper-windows or of any similar features, but as soon as I
returned and became conscious of the shabbiness of home, I found myself yearning for what
Waverhouse claims to despise. I am inclined to think that, after all, there’s a good deal more to
a businessman than there is to a teacher. Uncertain of the soundness of this thinking, I consult
my infallible tail. The oracle confirms that my thinking is correct.
     I am surprised to find Waverhouse still sitting in my master’s room.
     His cigarette stubs, stuffed into the brazier, make it look like a beehive.
     Comfortably cross-legged on the floor, he is, as usual, talking. It appears, moreover, that
during my absence Coldmoon has dropped in.
     My master, his head pillowed on his arms, lies flat on his back rapt in contemplation of the
pattern of the rainmarks on the ceiling. It is another of those meetings of hermits in a peaceful
reign.
     “Coldmoon, my dear fellow, I seem to remember that you insisted upon maintaining as the
darkest of dark secrets the name of that young lady who called your name from the depths of
her delirium. But surely the time has now come when you could reveal her identity?”
     Waverhouse begins to niggle Coldmoon.
     “Were it just solely my concern, I wouldn’t mind telling you, but since any such disclosure
might compromise the other party. . .”
     “So you still won’t tell?”
     “Besides, I promised the Doctor’s wife. . .”
     “Promised never to tell anyone?”
     “Yes,” says Coldmoon back at his usual fiddling with the strings of his surcoat. The strings
are a bright purple, objects of a color one could never nowadays find in any shop.
     “The color of those strings is early nineteenth century” remarks my supine master. He is
genuinely quite indifferent to anything that concerns the Goldfields.
     “Quite. It couldn’t possibly belong to these times of the Russo-Japanese War. That kind of
string would be appropriate only to the garments worn by the rank and file of soldiers under the
Shogunate. It is said that on the occasion of his marriage, nearly four hundred years ago, Oda
Nobunaga dressed his hair back in the fashion of a tea whisk, and I have no doubt his
projecting top-knot was bound with precisely such a string.” Waverhouse goes, as usual, all
around the houses to make his little point.
     “As a matter of fact, my grandfather wore these strings at the time, not forty years back,
when the Tokugawa were putting down the last rebellion before the restoration of the Emperor.”
Coldmoon takes it all dead seriously.
     “Isn’t it then about time you presented those strings to a museum?
     For that well-known lecturer on the mechanics of hanging, that leading bachelor of science,
Mr. Avalon Coldmoon to go around looking like a relic of mediaevalism would scarcely help his
reputation.”
     “I myself would be only too ready to follow your advice. However, there’s a certain person
who says that these strings do specially become me. . .”
     “Who on earth could have made such an imperceptive comment?”
     asks my master in a loud voice as he rolls over onto his side.
     “A person not of your acquaintance.”
     “Never mind that. Who was it?”
     “A certain lady.”
     “Gracious me, what delicacy! Shall I guess who it is? I think it’s the lady who whimpered for
you from the bottom of the Sumida River. Why don’t you tie up your surcoat with those nice
purple strings and go on out and get drowned again?” Waverhouse offers a helpful suggestion.
     Coldmoon laughs at the sally. “As a matter of fact she no longer calls me from the riverbed.
She is now, as it were, in the Pure Land, a little northwest from here. . .”
     “Don’t hope for too much purity. That ghastly nose looks singularly unwholesome.”
     “Eh?” says Coldmoon, looking puzzled.
     “The Archnose from over the way has just been round to see us. Yes, right here. I can tell
you we had quite a surprise. Hadn’t we, Sneaze?”
     “We had,” replies my master still lying on his side but now sipping tea.
     “Whom do you mean by the Archnose?”
     “We mean the honorable mother of your ever-darling lady.”
     “Oh!”
     “A woman calling herself Mrs. Goldfield came round here asking all sorts of questions
about you.” My master, clarifying the situation, speaks quite seriously.
     I watch poor Coldmoon, wondering if he will be surprised or pleased or embarrassed, but
in fact he looks exactly as he always does. And in his accustomed quiet tones he comments “I
suppose she’s asking if I’ll marry the daughter? Was that it?” and he goes on twisting and
untwisting his purple strings.
     “Far from it! That mother happens to own the most enormous nose. . .” But before
Waverhouse could finish his sentence my master interrupted him with a sudden irrelevance.
     “Listen,” he chirps, “I’ve been trying to compose a new-style haiku on that snout of hers.”
Mrs. Sneaze begins to giggle in the next room.
     “You’re taking it all extremely lightly! And have you composed your poem?”
     “I’ve made a start. The first line goes ‘A Conker Festival takes place in this face.’”
     “And then?”
     “‘At which one offers sacred wine.’”
     “And the concluding line?”
     “I’ve not yet got to that.”
     “Interesting,” says Coldmoon with a grin.
     “How about this for the missing line?” improvises Waverhouse. “‘Two orifices dim.’”
     Whereupon Coldmoon offers, “‘So deep no hairs appear.’”
      They were thus thoroughly enjoying themselves by proposing wilder and wilder lines when
from the street beyond the hedge came the voices of several people shouting “Where’s that
terra-cotta badger? Come on out, you terra-cotta badger. Terra-cotta badger! Yah!”
      Both my master and Waverhouse look somewhat startled and they peer out through the
hedge. Loud hoots of derisive laughter are followed by the sound of footsteps running away.
      “Whatever can they mean by a terra-cotta badger?”Waverhouse asks in puzzled tones.
      “I’ve no idea,” replies my master.
      “An unusual occurrence,” says Coldmoon.
      Waverhouse suddenly gets to his feet as if he had remembered something. “For some
several lustra,” he declaims in parody of the style of public lecturers, “I have devoted myself to
the study of aesthetic nasofrontology and I would accordingly now like to trespass on your time
and patience in order to present certain interim conclusions at which I have arrived.” His
initiative has been so suddenly taken that my master just stares up at him in silent blank
amazement.
      Coldmoon’s tiniest voice observes, “I’d love to hear your interim conclusions.”
      “Though I have made a thorough study of this matter, the origin of the nose remains, alas,
still deeply obfuscated. The first question that arises reflects the assumption that the nose is
intended for use. The functional approach. If that premise is valid, would not two mere vent-
holes meet the case? There is no obvious need either for such arrogant profusion or for the
nasal arrogation of a median position in the human physiognomy. Why then should the nasal
organ thus,” and he paused to pinch his own, “thrust itself forward?”
      “Yours doesn’t stick out much,” cuts in my master rather rudely.
      “At any rate it has no indentations, no incurvations; still less could it be described as
countersunk or infundibular. I draw your attention to these facts because if you fail to make the
necessary distinction between having two holes in the medio-frontal area of the face and having
two such holes in some form of protuberance, you will inevitably be unable to follow the
quintessential drift of my dissertation. Now, it is at least my own, albeit humble, opinion that it is
by an accumulation of human actions trifling in themselves, for who could attach major
importance to the blowing of one’s nose, that the organ in question has developed into its
present phenomenal form.”
      “How very humbly you do hold your humble views,” interjects my master.
      “As you will know, the act of blowing the nose involves the coarctation of that organ. Such
stenosis of the nose, such astrictive and, one might even venture to say, pleonastic stimulation
of so localized an area results, by response to that stimulus and in accordance with the well-
established principles of Lamarckian evolutionary theory, in the development of that specific
area to a degree disproportionate to the development of other areas. The epidermis of the
affected area inevitably indurates and the subcutaneous material so coagulates as eventually to
ossify.”
      “That’s a bit extreme. Surely you can’t turn flesh to bone just by blowing your nose.”
Coldmoon, as behoves a bachelor of science, lodges a protest. Waverhouse continues to
deliver his speech with the utmost nonchalance.
      “I can well appreciate your natural dubieties, but the proof of the pudding is the eating. For,
behold, there is bone there, and that bone has demonstrably been molded. Nevertheless, and
despite that bone, one snivels. If one snivels one has to blow the nose, and in the course of that
action both sides of the bone get worn away until the nose itself acquires the shape of a high
and narrow bulge. It is indeed a terrifying process.
     But just as little taps of dropping water will eventually bore through granite, so has the high,
straight ridge of the nasal organ been smithied by incessant nose-blows. Thus painfully was
fangled the hard straight line on one’s face.”
     “But yours is flabby.”
     “I deliberately refrain from any discussion of this particular feature as it may be observed in
the physiognomy of the lecturer himself; for such a purely personal approach involves the
dangers of self-exculpation, the temptation to gloss over, even to defend, one’s individual
defects or deficiencies. But the nose of the honorable Mrs. Goldfield is such that I would wish
to bring it to your attention as the most highly developed of its kind, the most egregiously rare
object, in the world.”
     Coldmoon cries out in spontaneous admiration. “Hear, hear.”
     “But anything whatever that develops to an extreme degree becomes thereby intimidating.
Even terrifying. Spectacular it may be, but simultaneously awesome, unapproachable. Thus the
bridge of that lady’s nose, though certainly magnificent, appears to me unduly rigid,
unacceptably steep. If one pauses to consider the nature of the noses of the ancients, it seems
probable that those of Socrates, Oliver Goldsmith, and William Thackeray were strikingly
imperfect from the structural point of view, but those very imperfections had their own peculiar
charms. This is, no doubt, the intellection behind the saying that a nose, like a mountain, is not
significant because it is high but because it is odd. Similarly, the popular catch-phrase that
‘dumplings are better than nosegays’ is no doubt a corruption of some yet more ancient adage
to the effect that dumplings are better than noses. From which it follows that, viewed
aesthetically, the nose of Citizen Waverhouse is just about right.”
     Coldmoon and my master greet this fantastication with peals of appreciative laughter, and
even Waverhouse joins in.
     “Now, the piece I have just been reciting. . .”
     “Distinguished speaker, I must object to your use of the phrase ‘reciting a piece’: a
somewhat vulgar word one would only expect from a storyteller.” Coldmoon, catching
Waverhouse in the use of language which only recently Waverhouse had criticized, feels himself
revenged.
     “In which case, sir, and having with your gracious permission purged myself of error, I
would now like to touch upon the matter of the proper proportion between the nose and its
associated face. If I were simply to discuss noses in disregard of their relation to other entities,
then I would declare without fear of contradiction that the nose of Mrs.
     Goldfield is superb, superlative, and, though possibly supervacaneous, one well-placed to
win first prize at any exhibition of nasal development which might be organized by the long-
nosed goblins on Mount Kurama.
     But alas! And even alack! That nose appears to have been formed, fashioned, dare I say
fabricated, without any regard for the configuration of such other major items as the eyes and
mouth. Julius Caesar was undoubtedly dowered with a very fine nose. But what do you think
would be the result if one scissored off that Julian beak and fixed it on the face of this cat here?
Cats’ foreheads are proverbially diminutive. To raise the tower of Caesar’s boned proboscis on
such a tiny site would be like plonking down on a chessboard the giant image of Buddha now to
be seen at Nara. The juxtaposing of disproportionate elements destroys aesthetic value. Mrs.
Goldfield’s nose, like that of Caesar’s, is, as a thing in itself, a most dignified and majestic
protuberance. But how does it appear in relation to its surroundings? Of course those
circumjacent areas are not quite so barren of aesthetic merit as the face of this cat.
     Nevertheless, it is a bloated face, the face of an epileptic skivvy whose eyebrows meet in a
sharp-pitched gable above thin tilted eyes.
     Gentlemen, I ask you, what sort of nose could ever survive so lamentable a face?”
     As Waverhouse paused, a voice could be heard from the back of the house. “He’s still
going on about noses. What a spiteful bore he is.”
     “That’s the wife of the rickshaw-owner,” my master explains to Waverhouse.
     Waverhouse resumes. “It is a great, if unexpected, honor for this present lecturer to
discover at, as it were, the back of the hall an interested listener of the gentle sex. I am
especially gratified that a gleam of charm should be added to my arid lecture by the bell-sweet
voice of this new participant. It is, indeed, a happiness unlooked for, a serendipity. To be worthy
of our beautiful lady’s patronage I would gladly alter the academic style of this discourse into a
more popular mode, but, as I am just about to discuss a problem in mechanics, the unavoidably
technical terminology may prove a trifle difficult for the ladies to comprehend. I must therefore
beg them to be patient.”
     Coldmoon responds to the mention of mechanics with his usual grin.
     “The point I wish to establish is that such a nose and such a face will never harmonize. In
brief, they cannot conform to Zeising’s rule of the Golden Section, a fact which I propose to
prove by use of a mechanical formula. We should first designate H as the height of the nose,
and α as the angle between the nose and the level surface of the face. Please note that W is,
of course, the weight of the nose. Are you with me thus far?”
     “Hardly,” breathes my master.
     “Coldmoon, what about you?”
     “I, too, am slightly at a loss.”
     “You distress me, Coldmoon. Sneaze doesn’t matter, but I’m shocked that you, a bachelor
of science, should fail to understand. This formula is a key part of my lecture. To abandon this
portion of my argument must render the whole endeavor pointless. However, such things can’t
be helped. I’ll omit the formula and merely deliver the peroration.”
     “Is there a peroration?” asks my master in genuine curiosity.
     “Why, naturally! A lecture without a peroration is like a Western dinner shorn of the dessert.
Now, listen, both of you, carefully. I am launching on my peroration. Gentlemen, if one reflects
upon the theory which I have advanced on this occasion and gives due weight to the related
theories of Virchow and of Wisemen, one is bound also to take appropriate account of the
problem of the heredity of congenital form.
     Furthermore, though there is a substantial body of evidence to support the contention that
acquired characteristics are not hereditarily transmissible, one cannot lightly dismiss the view
that the mental conditions associated with hereditarily transmissible forms are themselves also
transmissible. It is consequently reasonable to assume that a child born to the possessor of a
nose of such enormity will have an abnormal nose.
     Because Coldmoon is still young, he has not noticed any particular abnormality in the
structure of Miss Goldfield’s nasal organ. But the genes lurk. The products of heredity take long
to incubate. One never knows. Perhaps it would need no more than a sharp change of climate
for the daughter’s snout suddenly to germinate and, in a mere instant, to tumesce into a replica
of that of her most honorable mother. In sum, I believe that in the light of my theoretical
demonstration, it would seem prudent to forswear any idea of this marriage. Now, while it is still
possible to do so. I would go so far as to claim that, quite apart from the master of this house,
even his monstrous cat asleep among us, would not dissent my conclusions.”
     My master sits up at last. “Of course,” he says “no one in his senses would ever marry a
daughter of that creature! Really, my dear Coldmoon,” he insists in real earnest, “you simply
must not marry her.”
     I seek in my own humble way to second all these sentiments by mewing twice. Coldmoon,
however, does not seem to be particularly alarmed. “If you two sages share that opinion, I
would be prepared to give her up, but it would be cruel if the consequent distress brought the
person in question into poor health.”
     “That,” burbled Waverhouse happily, “might even be regarded as a sort of sex crime.”
     Only my master continues to take the matter seriously. “Don’t joke about such things. That
girl wouldn’t wither away, not if she’s the daughter of that forward and presumptuous creature
who strove to humiliate me from the moment she set an uninvited foot in my house.” My master
again works himself up into a great huff.
     At which point there is a further outbreak of laughter from, by the sound of it, three or four
people on the far side of the hedge. A voice says, “You’re a stuck-up blockhead.” Another
jeers, “I bet you’d like to live in a bigger house.”A third loud voice announces, “Ain’t it a pity! You
swagger around but you’re only a silly old windbag.”
     My master goes out on to the veranda and shouts with matching violence, “Hold your
tongues. What do you think you’re doing making this sort of disturbance so close to my
property?”
     The laughter gets even louder. “Hark at him. It’s silly old Savage Tea.
     Savage Tea. Savage Tea.”They set up an abusive chant.
     My master, looking furious, turns abruptly, snatches up his stick and rushes out into the
street.
     Waverhouse claps his hands in pure delight. “Up guards and at ’em” he shouts, urging my
master on.
     Coldmoon sits and grins, twisting his purple fastening-strings.
     I follow my master and, as I crawl out through a gap in the hedge, find him standing in the
middle of the street with his stick held awkwardly in his hand. Apart from him, the street is
empty. I cannot help but feel that he’s been made to make a ninny of himself.
VOLUME II
                                                 I



    T HAS become my usual practice to I sneak into the Goldfields’ mansion. I won’t expand

I   upon the meaning of my use of “usual,” which is merely a word expressing the square of
    “often.” What one does once, one wants to do again, and things tried twice invite a third
    experience. This sense of enquiry is not confined to humanity, and I must ask you to accept
that every cat born into this world is endowed with this psychological peculiarity. Just as in the
human case, so with cats: once we’ve done a thing more than three times over, the act
becomes a habit and its performance a necessity of our daily life. If you should happen to
wonder why I so often visit the Goldfield place, let me first address a modest enquiry to
mankind. Why do human beings breathe smoke in through the mouth and then expel it through
the nose? Since such shameless inhalation and exhalation can do little to ease the belly’s
hunger and less to cure giddiness, I do not see why a race of habitual smokers should dare to
offer criticism of my calls on the Goldfields. That house is my tobacco.
     To say that I “sneak in” gives a misleading impression: it sounds vaguely reprehensible, a
term to be used for the self-insinuations of thieves and clandestine lovers. Though it is true that
I am not an invited guest, I do not go to the Goldfields’ in order to snitch a slice of bonito or for
a cozy chat with that disgusting lapdog whose eyes and nose are convulsively agglomerated in
the center of its face. Hardly! Or are you suggesting that I visit there for the sheer love of
snooping? Me, a detective?
     You must be out of your mind! Among the several most degrading occupations in this world,
there are, in my opinion, none more grubby than those of the detective and the money-lender. It
is true that once, for Coldmoon’s sake, I displayed a chivalrous spirit unbecoming in a cat and
kept an indirectly watchful eye on the Goldfields’ goings on. It was but once that I acted with
such ill-placed kind-heartedness, and since that isolated occasion I have done nothing
whatsoever that could bring a twinge to the conscience of the most pernickety cat. In which
case, you may ask, why did I describe my own actions with such an unpleasantly suggestive
phrase as “to sneak in?” I have my own good reasons, but their explanation involves analysis in
depth.
     In the first place it is my opinion that the sky was made to shelter all creation, and that the
earth was made so that all things created that were able to stand might have something to
stand on. Even those human beings who love argument for the arguing’s sake could surely not
deny this fact. Next we may ask to what extent did human effort contribute to the creation of
heaven and earth, and the answer is that it contributed nothing. What right, then, do human
beings hold to decide that things not of their own creation nevertheless belong to them? Of
course the absence of right need not prevent such creatures from making that decision, but
surely there can be no possible justification for them prohibiting others from innocent passage in
and out of so-called human property. If it be accepted that Mr. So-and-so may set up stakes,
fence off sections of this boundless earth, and register that area as his own, what is to prevent
such persons from roping off blue sky, from staking claims on heaven, an enclosure of the air?
If natural law permitted proprietorial parceling-out of the land and its sale and purchase at so
much the square foot, then it would also permit partition of the air we breathe at so much the
cubic unit and its three-dimensional sale. If, however, it is not proper to trade in sky, if
enclosure of the empyrean is not regarded as just in natural law, then surely it must follow that
all land-ownership is unnatural and irrational. That, in fact, is my conviction, therefore I enter
wherever I like. Naturally, I do not go anywhere where I do not want to go: but, provided they
are in the direction I fancy, all places are alike to me. I slope along as it suits me, and feel no
inhibition about entering the properties of people like the Goldfields if I happen to want to.
However, the sad fact is that, being no more than a cat, I cannot match mankind in the crude
matter of simple physical strength. In this real world the saying that “might is right” has very real
force; so much so that no matter how sound my arguments may be, the logic of cats will not
command respect. Were I to press the argument too far, I should be answered, like Rickshaw
Blacky, with a swipe from a fishmonger’s pole. In situations where reason and brute force are
opposed and one may choose either to submit by a perversion of reason or to achieve one’s
reasonable ends by outwitting the opposition, I would, of course, adopt the latter course. If one
is not to be maimed with bamboo poles, one must put up with things: one must press on. Thus,
since the concept of trespass is irrational, and since “sneaking in” is only a form of “pressing
on,” I am prepared to describe my visits as sneaking in.
     Though I have no wish whatsoever to spy upon the Goldfields, inevitably, as the number of
my visits mount, I get to know things about that family which I’d rather not have known and I
see happenings which, willy-nilly, I cannot purge from my memory. I am, for instance, regretfully
aware that when Madam Conk dabs water on her face she wipes her nose with inordinate
care; that Miss Opula persistently gluts herself on rice-cakes dusted with bean-flour; and that
old man Goldfield, in striking contrast with his wife, has a nose as flat as a pancake. Indeed,
not just his nose, but his whole face is flat. It is a face so leveled one suspects that when he
was a lad he must have got into a fight with the strong boy of some children’s gang who,
grabbing him by the scruff of the neck, rammed his face so hard against a plaster wall that
even now, forty years on, his squashed and crumpled features are a living memento of that
unlucky day. Though it is certainly an extremely peaceful, even a harmless, face, it is somewhat
lacking in variety. However much that face becomes infuriated, still it stays flat. I came to learn,
moreover, that old man Goldfield likes tuna fish, sliced and raw, and that whenever he eats that
delicacy, he pats himself on his own bald pate with a plashy, pattering sound. Further, because
his body is as squat as his face is flat, he affects tall hats and high-stepped wooden clogs;
facts which his personal rickshawman finds so vastly entertaining that he’s always yattering on
about them to the houseboy who, for his part, finds such sharp accuracy of observation
impressively remarkable. I could go on forever with such details of the Goldfields’ goings-on.
     It has become my practice to enter the garden by the back-gate and to survey the lie of the
land from the cover of a small artificial mound helpfully constructed there for decorative
purposes. Having made sure that everything is quiet and that all the paper-windows are slid
shut, I gingerly creep forward and hop up onto the veranda. But if I hear lively voices or
consider there’s a risk that I might be seen from within, I mosey off eastward around the pond,
nip past the lavatory and finish up, safe and unobserved, under the veranda. My conscience is
in no way troubled, I’ve nothing to hide and no reason to be scared of anything whatsoever, but
I’ve learnt what to expect if one should have the vile ill-luck to run up against one of those
lawless and disorderly bipeds. Were the human world cram-jammed with robber-toughs as
violent as that long-departed villain, Kumasaka Chōhan, then even the most illustrious and
virtuous of men would act as cautiously as I do. Inasmuch, as old man Goldfield is a dignified
sort of businessman, I wouldn’t expect him to come after me with any such dirty great sword,
five feet, three inches of it they tell me, as Kumasaka was wont to brandish. However, from
what I’ve seen and heard, Goldfield has his own unpleasant quirks and is certainly not disposed
to accept that a man’s a man for a’ that. If Goldfield is overbearing with his fellowmen, how
would he treat a cat? A cat, as I keep on saying, is also a cat for a’ that, but given Goldfield’s
nature, even a feline of the most upright virtues would be wise to adopt a low posture and a
very cautious attitude once inside the Goldfield premises.
     This very need to be constantly on the qui vive is, I find, delightful, and my taste for danger
explains why I make these frequent risky visits. I will give further and careful thought to this
fascinating point and, when I have completed my analysis of cat-mentality, I will publish the
results.
     What’s up today, I wonder, as I settle my chin against the grass on top of the garden-
hillock and survey the prospect spread below me. The doors of their ample drawing room are
open wide to the full spring day and I can see, inside, the Goldfields busily engaged in
conversation with a guest. I am somewhat daunted by the fact that Madam Conk’s proboscis is
pointed directly in my direction: it glares across the pond straight at my unprotected forehead.
This is my first experience of being glared at by a nose. Facing his guest, old man Goldfield
presents himself to my gaze in full profile. My eyes are spared one half of his flattened features
but, for the same profilic reason, the location of his nose is indeterminable, and it is only
because one can see where his grayish-white moustache sprouts raggedly from the flesh that
one can deduce that the vent-holes of his nostrils must be gaping closely thereabove. I amuse
myself with the reflection that the light spring breeze might well blow on forever if it encountered
no more formidable obstruction than that jutless physiognomy. Of the three, the Goldfields’
guest has the most normal features but, precisely because of their regularity, there’s no facial
peculiarity I see reason to point out. For anything to be regular suggests that the thing’s all
right, but regularity can be so utterly regular as to become, by its very ulteriority, mediocre and
of no account, which is extremely pitiable.
     I wonder who he is, this unfortunate fellow fated to be born in this glorious reign behind so
meaningless a phiz. My curiosity can’t be satisfied unless I crawl more close and, in my
accustomed manner, establish myself underneath the veranda and listen to what is said. So
under it I go.
     “. . .and my wife actually took the trouble to call on the man to ask for information.”As
usual, old man Goldfield speaks in an arrogant manner. The manner is certainly prideful, but his
voice contains no hint of sharpness. It gives, like his face, an impression of massive flatness.
     “I see. So he’s the fellow who used to teach your Mr. Avalon Coldmoon. I see, I see. Yes,
yours is a good idea. . . Indeed, I see.” This guest is positively overflowing with “I see’s.”
     “But somehow my wife’s approaches all proved pretty pointless.”
     “No wonder. Sneaze is not strong on point. Even in the days when he and I shared digs and
looked after ourselves, his lack of point, his lack of resolution, were painfully extreme. You
must,” he said, turning to Madam Conk, “have had a difficult time.”
     “Difficult! That’s hardly the word. Never in my life have I made a visit and been so badly
treated.” As is her ugly custom, Madam Conk snorts storm-winds down her snout.
     “Did he say anything rude to you? He’s always been obstinate, a real old stick-in-the-mud.
He’s been teaching that English Reader for years without a break, so you can imagine. . .” With
what charm and tact this guest is making himself agreeable.
     “He is beyond help. I understand that every time my wife asked a question, she received a
blunt rebuff.”
     “What impudence! As I see it, persons of some small education tend to grow conceited
and, if they happen also to be poor, their characters become as bitter as sour grapes. Indeed,
some people in that condition turn truly quite absurd. For no reason at all, they flare up at
persons of wealth as if unconscious of their own total ineffectiveness. It’s quite astonishing how
they behave; as if the rich had robbed them personally of things they never owned.”The guest’s
laughter rang out affectedly, but he certainly seems delighted with himself.
     “Scandalous behavior! It’s because they know nothing of the world that they carry on so
outrageously. So I thought I’d have him taken down a peg or two. It’s time he learned how
many beans make six.”
     “I see. Splendid. That should have shaken him up a bit. Done him no end of good.”
Goldfield is smothered in his guest’s congratulations, even though that sycophant still lacks the
least idea of the kind of rod which Goldfield’s put in pickle for poor Sneeze.
     “But really, Mr. Suzuki, Sneaze is impossible. D’you know,” said Madam Conk, “down at his
school he won’t exchange two words with our friend, Mr. Fukuchi? Nor, come to think of it, with
Mr. Tsuki either.
     We’d thought he’d learnt his lesson and was keeping quiet because he knew he’s been sat
on, but, would you believe it, only the other day we heard he’d been chasing after our harmless
houseboy with a walking stick!
     Just imagine that. He’s a man of thirty. No sane grown-up could act in such a way.
Perhaps,” she ended hopefully, “despair has driven him dotty.”
     “But what can have driven him to such an act of violence?”Their guest seems mystified that
Sneaze could act so firmly.
     “Nothing much really. It seems that our houseboy happened to be passing Sneaze’s place,
made some innocent remark, and, before you could say Jack Robinson, Sneaze came rushing
out in his bare feet and began lashing around with his stick. Whatever the houseboy may have
said, he is, after all, no more than a boy. But Sneaze is a bearded man and, what’s more,
supposed to be a teacher.”
     “Some teacher,” says the guest.
     “Some teacher,” echoed Goldfield.
     It would seem that this precious trio has reached complete agreement that, if one happens
to be a teacher, one should, like some wooden statue, grin and bear whatever insults anyone
cares to offer.
     “And then,” said Madam Conk, “there’s that fibbing crank called Waverhouse. I’ve never
heard a man tell such a stream of whoppers. All quite pointless, but all f lat lies. Really, I’ve
never clapped eyes on such a loony in my life.”
     “Waverhouse? Yes, he seems to be bragging on as usual. Was he also there when you
called on Sneaze? He, too, can be a tricky customer. He was another of our group in digs. I
remember I was always having rows with him on account of his incessant, ill-judged mockery
and his warped sense of humor.”
     “A man like that would rile a saint. We all, of course, tell lies, sometimes out of loyalty,
sometimes by demand of the occasion, and in such circumstances anyone may fairly bend the
truth. But that man Waverhouse tells his lies for no good reason at all. What can one do with a
man like that? I just can’t see how he brings himself to rattle off such reams of barefaced
balderdash. What does he expect to gain by it?”
      “You’ve hit the nail on the head. There’s nothing one can do when a man tells lies for a
hobby.”
      “I made a special visit to that miserable house to ask no more than the normal questions
about Avalon that any mother would, but all my efforts came to nothing; they vexed me and
they put me down. But all the same, I felt obliged to do the decent thing, so afterward I sent
our rickshawman around with a dozen bottles of beer. Can you imagine what happened? That
saucy usher Sneaze had the cheek to order our man to take the bottles away because, so he
said, he saw no reason why he should accept them. Our fellow pressed him to take the bottles
as a token of our appreciation. So then Sneaze said that he liked jam but reckoned beer too
bitter. Then he just shut the door and went off back to his room. Now can you beat that? How
damned rude can one get?”
      “That’s terrible.” The guest seems, this time genuinely, to think it’s really terrible.
      After a brief pause I hear the voice of old man Goldfield. “And that’s, in fact, precisely why
we’ve asked you here today. It’s something, of course, to make fun of that fool Sneaze behind
his back, but that sort of thing doesn’t entirely suit our present purpose. . .” Splash, spatter;
spatter, spatter, splash. He’s patting his pate as though he’s just been eating sliced, raw tuna
fish. Of course, being tucked away underneath the veranda, I cannot actually see him beating
that wet tattoo on the skin of his hairless head, but I’ve seen so much of him lately that, just as
a priestess in a temple gets to recognize the sound of each particular wooden gong, so I can
tell, from the quality of the sound, even though I’m under the floor, when old man Goldfield
takes to drumming on his skull.
      “And it occurred to me to ask for your assistance in this matter. . .”
      “If I can be of any service, please don’t hesitate to ask me. After all, it’s entirely due to your
kind influence that I have had the great good fortune to be transferred to the Tokyo office.”
Their guest is so obviously anxious to oblige that he must be another of those many persons
under obligation to return some form of help to Goldfield. Well, well, so the plot thickens. I
wandered out today simply because the weather was so wonderful, and I certainly had not
expected to stumble upon such exciting news of planned skulduggery. It is as though one had
gone to the family temple dutifully intending to feed the Hungry Dead, only to find oneself invited
to a right old lash-up of rice-cake dumplings and bean-paste jam in the private room of a priest.
Wondering what kind of assistance will be sought from this client-guest, I prick my ears to
listen.
      “Don’t ask me to explain it, but that nitwitted teacher keeps planting crazy notions in the
head of young Coldmoon: like, for instance, hinting that he shouldn’t marry any daughter of
mine.” He turned to his wife.
      “That’s what he hinted, didn’t he?”
      “Hinting’s not the word. He said flat out ‘No one in his senses would ever marry a daughter
of that creature. Coldmoon,’ he said,‘you simply mustn’t marry her.’”
      “Well, blow me down. Did he really have, the brazen cheek to speak of me as a creature?
Did he really pitch it as strong as that?”
      “Not half he didn’t. The wife of the rickshawman came around double-quick just to be sure I
knew.”
     “Well, there you are, Suzuki. That man Sneaze is getting to be a nuisance, wouldn’t you
agree?”
     “How extremely irritating. Marriage negotiations are not matters in which to meddle lightly.
Surely even a dunderhead like Sneaze ought to have the common sense to know that. Really,
the whole thing’s beyond my comprehension.”
     “In your undergraduate days you lived in the same boarding-house as Sneaze, and, though
things may have changed by now, I understand that you two then used to be pretty pally. Now,
what I want you to do is to go and see Sneaze and try to talk some reason into him. He may be
feeling offended, but if he is, it’s really all his own fool fault. If he plays ball, I’d be willing to give
him generous help with his personal affairs, and we would, of course, lay off annoying him. But
if he keeps on gumming things up the way he’s so far done, it will only be natural if I find ways
of my own to settle his meddlesome hash. In short, it just won’t pay him to go on acting
obstinate.”
     “How very right you are. Continued resistance on his part would be idiotic. It could bring him
no possible profit and could well cause him loss. I’ll do my best to make him understand.”
     “One more thing. Since there are many other suitors for our daughter, I can’t make any firm
promise of giving her to Coldmoon, but you could usefully go so far as to hint that, if he studies
hard and gets his degree in the near future, he stands a chance of winning her.”
     “That should encourage him to buckle down to study. All right, I’ll do as you wish.”
     “One last thing. It may sound odd, but what especially sticks in my gullet is the way that
Coldmoon, who’s supposed to be so smart, laps up everything that Sneaze lets drop, and even
goes around addressing that crack-brained ninny as though he were some kind of sage
professor.
     Of course, since Coldmoon’s not the only man we are considering for Opula, such
unbecoming conduct is not of vast importance.
     Nevertheless. . .”
     “You see,” squawked Madam Conk, butting in on her husband’s careful sentence, “it’s just
that we’re sorry for Coldmoon.”
     “I’ve never had the pleasure of meeting the gentleman, but, since to marry into your
distinguished family would be to ensure a lifetime’s happiness, I’m quite convinced that he
himself could not possibly wish other than the marriage.”
     “You’re absolutely right,” said Madam Conk. “Coldmoon’s keen to marry her. It’s only that
numbskull Sneaze and his crackpot crony Waverhouse who keep throwing spanners in the
works.”
     “Most reprehensible. Not the style of behavior one expects from any reasonable, well-
educated person. I’ll go and talk with Sneaze.”
     “Please do, we’d be most grateful. Remember, too, that Sneaze knows better than anyone
else what Coldmoon’s really like. As you know, during her recent call my wife failed to dig out
anything much worth knowing. If in addition to ascertaining details of his scholastic talent and all
that stuff, you could also find out more about Coldmoon’s character and conduct, I’d be
particularly obliged.”
     “Certainly. Since it’s Saturday today, Sneaze must be home by now.
     Where does he live, I wonder,” says Suzuki.
     “You turn right from our place, then turn left at the end of the road.
     About one block along, you’ll see a house with a tumbled down black fence. That,” said
Madam Conk, “is it.”
     “So it’s right here in this neighborhood! Then it should be easy. I’ll go and see him on my
way home. It will be simple to identify the house by the name plate.”
     “You may, or you may not, find his name plate on display. I understand he uses one or two
grains of cooked rice to stick his visiting card on his wooden gate. When it rains, of course, the
cardboard comes unstuck. Then on some convenient sunny day he’ll paste another card in
place. So you can’t be sure that his name plate will be up. It’s hard to see why he keeps to
such a trouble some routine when the obvious thing to do is to hang up a wooden name board.
But that,” sighed Madam Conk, “is just another example of his general cussedness.”
     “Astonishing,” remarked Suzuki, “but I’ll find the place in any case by asking for the house
with the black fence in a state of disrepair.”
     “Oh yes, you’ll find it easily enough. There’s not another house in the whole neighborhood
quite so filthy-looking. Wait a minute! I’ve just remembered something else. Look for a house
with weeds growing out of the roof. It’s impossible to miss.”
     “In fact, a quite distinguished residence,” said Suzuki and, laughing, took his leave.
     It would not suit my book to have Suzuki beat me home. I’ve already overheard as much as
I need to know; so, still concealed beneath the veranda, I retrace my steps to the lavatory
where, turning west, I briefly break cover to get back behind the hillock and, under its
concealment, regain the safety of the street. A brisk cattrot soon brings me to the house with
the weed-grown roof where, with the utmost nonchalance, I hopped up onto our own veranda.
     My master had spread a white woolen blanket on the wooden boards and was lying there,
face down, with the sunshine of this warm spring day soaking into his back. Sunshine, unlike
other things, is distributed fairly. It falls impartially upon the rich and the poor. It makes a
squalid hut, whose only distinctions are the tufts of shepherd’s purse sprouting from its roof, no
less gaily warm than, for all its solid comfort, the Goldfields’ mansion. I am, however, obliged to
confess that that blanket jars with the day’s spring feeling. No doubt its manufacturer meant
that it should be white. No doubt, too, it was sold as white by some haberdasher specializing in
goods imported from abroad. No less certainly, my master must have asked for a white blanket
at the time he bought it. But all that happened twelve or thirteen years ago, and since that far-
off Age of White, the blanket has declined into a Dark Age where its present color is a somber
gray. No doubt the passage of time will eventually turn it black, but I’d be surprised if the thing
survived that long. It is already so badly worn that one can easily count the individual threads of
its warp and woof. Its wooliness is gone and it would be an exaggeration, even a presumption,
to describe this scrawny half-eroded object as a blanket. A “blan,” possibly; even a “ket,” but a
full-blown “blanket,” no. However, my master holds, or at least appears to hold, that anything
which one has kept for a year, two years, five years, and eventually for a decade, must then be
kept for the rest of one’s natural life. One would think he were a gypsy. Anyway, what’s he
doing, sprawled belly-down on that remnant of the past? He lies with his chin stuck out, its jut
supported on a crotch of hands, with a lighted cigarette projecting from his right-hand fingers.
     And that is all he’s doing. Of course inside his skull, deep below the dandruff, universal
truths may be spinning around in a shower of fiery sparks like so many Catherine Wheels. It’s
possible but, judging from his external appearance, not likely even in one’s wildest imaginings.
     The cigarette’s lit tip is steadily burning down and an inch of ash, like some gray caddis-
case, plopped down onto the blanket. My master, ignoring that declension, stares intently at the
rising smoke. Stirred by the light spring breeze, the smoke floats up in loops and vortices,
finally to gather in a kind of clinging haze around the ends of his wife’s just-washed black hair.
Gentle reader, please accept my apologies. I had completely forgotten to mention that lady’s
presence.
     Mrs. Sneaze is sitting so that her bottom presents itself before her husband’s face. You
think that impolite? Speaking for myself I would not call it so. Both courtesy and discourtesy
depend on one’s point of view.
     My master is lying perfectly at ease with his cupped face in close proximity to his wife’s
bottom: he is neither disturbed by its proximity nor concerned at his own conduct. His wife is
equally composed to position her majestic bum bang in her husband’s face. There is neither the
slightest hint nor intention of discourtesy. They are simply a much-married couple who, in less
than a year of wedlock, sensibly disengaged themselves from the cramps of etiquette. Mrs.
Sneaze seems to have taken advantage of the exceptionally fine weather to give her pitch-black
hair a really thorough wash with a concoction made from raw eggs and some special kind of
seaweed. Somewhat ostentatiously, she has let her long straight hair hang loose around her
shoulders and all the way down her back, and sits, busy and silent, sewing a child’s sleeveless
jacket. In point of fact, I believe it is purely because she wants to dry her hair that she’s brought
both her sewing-box and a flattish cushion made from some all-woolen muslin out here. It is
similarly to present her hair at the best angle to the sun that, deferentially, she presents her
bottom to her spouse. That’s my belief, but it may, of course, be that my master moved to
intrude his face where her bum already was.
     Now, to return to that business of the cigarette smoke, my master lay watching with
fascinated absorption the way in which the smoke, floating upward through his wife’s abundant
and now loosened hair, was itself combed into an appearance of filaments of blue-gray air.
However, it is in the nature of smoke to go on rising, so that my master’s fascination with this
singular spectacle of hair-entangled smoke compels him, lest he miss any phase of its
development, steadily to lift his gaze. His eyes, first leveled on her hips, move up her back, over
her shoulders, and along her neck. And it was after his concentrated stare had completed the
ascent of her neck and was focused on the very crown of her head that he suddenly let out an
involuntary gasp of surprise.
     For there, on the very summit of the lady whom he had promised to love and cherish till
death did them part, was a large round patch of baldness. That unexpected nakedness,
catching the clear spring sunshine, threw back the light and shone with an almost braggart self-
confidence. My master’s eyes remain fixed open in surprise at this dazzling discovery and,
disregarding the danger of such brightness to his own uncovered retinal tissue, he continues to
goggle at her skin’s bright mirror. The image that then immediately shot into my master’s mind
was of that dish on which stood the taper set before the altar in the household shrine handed
down in his family for untold generations. My master’s family belongs to the Shin sect of
Buddhism, a sect in which it is the established custom to lay out substantial sums, more indeed
than most of its adherents can afford, on household shrines. My master suddenly remembers
how, when he was a very small boy, he first saw the shrine in the family safe-room. It was a
miniature shrine, somber though thickly gilded, in which a brass taper-dish was hanging. From
the burning taper a faint light shone, even in the day time, on the rounded dish.
     Bright against the shrine’s general darkness, that image of the shining dish, seen in his
childhood time and time again, leapt back into his mind as he gaped at his wife’s bald patch.
But that first remembrance quickly vanished, to be replaced by memories of the pigeons at the
Kannon Temple in Asakusa. There seems no obvious connection between temple doves and
Mrs. Sneaze’s gleaming scalp, but in my master’s mind the association of images is clear and
very close. It, again, is an association deriving from his early childhood. Whenever then he was
taken to that temple, he would buy peas for the pigeons. The peas cost less than a farthing a
saucer. The saucers, made of an unglazed reddish clay, were remarkably similar, both in size
and color, to his wife’s bare patch.
     “Astonishingly similar.” The words escape from his lips in tones of an awed wonder.
     “What is?” says his wife without even turning toward him.
     “What is? There’s a big bald patch on the crown of your head. Did you know?”
     “Yes,” she answers, still not interrupting her sewing. She seems not the least embarrassed
by his discovery. A model wife, at least in point of imperturbability.
     “Was it there before we married or did it crop up later?”Though my master does not come
out with an open accusation, he clearly sounds as if he would regard himself as having been
tricked into marriage if the bald patch was, in fact, present in her maidenhood.
     “I don’t remember when I got it. Not that it matters. Whatever difference could a bald patch
make?” Quite the philosopher, isn’t she just.
     “Not that it matters! But it’s your own hair that we’re talking about.”
     My master speaks with a certain sharpness.
     “It’s just because it is my own hair that it doesn’t matter.” An effective answer, but she may
have been feeling slightly self-conscious for she lifted her right hand gently to stroke the spot.
“Oh dear,” she said, “it’s got much bigger. I hadn’t realized that.” Her tone conceded that the
patch was larger than would be normal at her age and, now driven onto the defensive, she
added, “Once one starts doing one’s hair in the married style, the strands at the crown come
under a very real strain. All married women lose hair from the top of the head.”
     “If all married women lost hair at your rate, by the time they were forty they’d be bald as
kettles. You must have caught some kind of disease. Maybe it’s contagious. You’d better go
round and have it looked at by Dr. Amaki before things go too far,” says my master, carefully
stroking his own head.
     “That’s all very well, but what about you? White hairs in your nostrils! If baldness is
contagious, white hairs will be catching.” Mrs. Sneaze begins to go over to the attack.
     “A single, white hair in the nostrils is obviously harmless, and it doesn’t even show. But fox-
mange on the crown of the head cannot be ignored. It is, especially in the case of a young
woman, positively unsightly. It’s a deformity.”
     “If you think I’m deformed, why did you marry me? It was you who wanted the marriage,
yet now you call me deformed. . .”
     “For the simple reason that I didn’t know. Indeed, I was unaware of your condition until this
very day. If you want to make an issue of it, why didn’t you reveal your naked scalp to me
before we got married?”
     “What a silly thing to say! Where in the world would you find a place where girls had to
have their scalps examined before they could get married?”
     “Well, the baldness might be tolerable but you’re also uncommonly dumpy, and that is
certainly unsightly.”
     “There’s never been anything hidden about my height. You knew perfectly well when you
married me that I’m slightly on the short side.”
     “Of course I knew, but I’d thought you might extend a bit, and that’s why I married you.”
     “How could anyone grow taller after the age of twenty? Are you trying to make a fool of
me? Eh?” She drops the sleeveless jacket and, twisting around to face her husband, gives him
a threatening look as if to say,
     “Now watch your step, you go too far, and you’ll be sorry.”
     “There is surely no law forbidding people from growing taller after the age of twenty. I
cherished a faint hope that, if I fed you up on decent food, you might prolong yourself.” With
every appearance of meaning what he said, my master was about to develop his curious
reasoning, when he was cut off by a sharp ringing of the doorbell followed by a loud shout of
“Hello.” Snuffling after the scent of that shepherd’s purse on the roof, the dogged Suzuki seems
at last to have tracked down Sneaze’s den.
     My master’s wife, temporarily postponing their domestic row, snatches up the jacket and
her sewing-box and vanishes into an inner room. My master scrabbles his gray blanket up into
a ball and slings it into the study. The maid brings in the visitor’s card and gives it to my master,
who, having read it, looks a little surprised. Then, having told the maid to show the visitor in, he
goes off into the lavatory with the card still clasped in his hand. If it is beyond one’s
comprehension that he should thus suddenly take to the loo, it is even more difficult to explain
why he should have taken with him the visiting-card of Suzuki Tōjūrō. It is, in any case, very
hard luck on the soul of that visiting-card that it should have to accompany him to that noisome
place.
     The maid deposits a printed, cotton cushion on the floor in front of the alcove-recess,
invites the guest to be seated in that place of honor, and then removes herself. Suzuki first
inspects the room. He begins by examining the scroll displayed in the alcove: its Chinese
characters, allegedly written by Mokuan, that master calligrapher of the Zen sect, are, of
course, faked, but they state that flowers are in bloom and that spring is come to all the world.
He next tarns his attention to some early-flowering cherry-blossoms arranged in one of those
celadon vases which they turn out cheap in Kyoto. Then, when his roving glance chances to fall
upon the cushion provided for his particular convenience, what should he find but, planted
serenely smack in its center, a squatting cat. I need hardly add that the cat in question is my
lordly self.
     It was at this point that the first quick tremor of tension, a ripple so small it did not show on
his face, quaked in Suzuki’s mind. That cushion had undoubtedly been provided for himself but
before he could sit down on it, some strange animal, without so much as a by-your-leave, had
dispossessed him of the seat of honor and now lay crouched upon it with an air of firm self-
confidence. This was the first consideration to disturb the composure of his mind. In point of
fact, had the cushion remained unoccupied, Suzuki would probably have sought to demonstrate
his modesty by resting his rump on the hard matfloor until such time as my master himself
invited its transfer to the comfort of the cushion. So who the hell is this that has so blithely
appropriated the cushion which was destined, sooner or later, to have eased Suzuki buttocks?
Had the interloper been a human being, he might well have given way. But to be pre-empted by
a mere cat, that is intolerable. It is also a little unpleasant.
     This minor animality of his dissedation was the second consideration to disturb the
composure of Suzuki’s mind. There was, moreover, something singularly irritating about the
very attitude of the cat. Without the least small twitch-sign of apology, the cat sits arrogantly on
the cushion it has filched and, with a cold glitter in its unamiable eyes, stares up into Suzuki’s
face as if to say, “And who the hell are you?” This is the third consideration to ruffle Suzuki’s
composure. Of course if he’s really irked, he ought to jerk me off the cushion by the scruff of
my neck. But he doesn’t. He just watches me in silence. It is inconceivable that any creature as
massive and muscular as man could be so afraid of a cat as not to dare to bring crude force to
bear in any clash of wills. So why doesn’t Suzuki express his dislike by turfing me off the
cushion with summary dispatch? The reason is, I think, that Suzuki is inhibited by his own
conception of the conduct proper to a man. When it comes to the use of force any child three
feet tall can, and will, fling me about quite easily. But a full-grown man, even Suzuki Tōjūrō,
Goldfield’s right-hand man, cannot bring himself to raise a finger against this Supreme Cat Deity
ensconced upon the holy ground of a cotton cushion two feet square. Even though there were
no witnesses, a man would regard it as beneath his dignity to scuffle with a cat for possession
of a cushion. One would make oneself ridiculous, even a figure of farce, if one degraded
oneself to the level of arguing with a cat. For Suzuki, the price of this human estimate of human
dignity is to endure a certain amount of discomfort in the nates, but precisely because he feels
he must endure it, his hatred of the cat is proportionately increased. When, every now and
again he looks at me, his face exudes distaste. Since I find it amusing to see such wry
distortion of his features, I do my best myself to maintain an air of innocence and resist the
temptation to laugh.
     While this pantomime was still going on, my master left the lavatory and, having tidied
himself up, came in and sat down. “Hello,” he said.
     Since the visiting card is no longer in his hand, the name of Suzuki Tōjūrō must have been
condemned to penal servitude for life in that evil-smelling place. Almost before I could feel sorry
for the visiting card’s ill-luck, my master, saying, “Oh, you!” grabs me by the scruff of my neck
and hurls me out to land with a bang on the veranda.
     “Do take this cushion. You’re quite a stranger. When did you come up to Tokyo?” My
master offers the cushion to his old friend, and Suzuki, having turned it catside-down, dumps
himself upon it.
     “As I’ve been so busy I haven’t let you know, but I was recently transferred back to our
main office in Tokyo.”
     “That’s splendid. We haven’t seen each other for quite a long while.
     This must be the first time since you went off to the provinces?”
     “Yes, nearly ten years ago. Actually, I did sometimes come up to Tokyo, but as I was
always flooded with business commitments, I simply couldn’t manage to get round to see you. I
do hope you won’t think too badly of me. But, unlike your own profession, a business firm is
honestly very busy.”
     “Ten years make big changes,” observes my master, looking Suzuki up and down. His hair
is neatly parted. He wears an English-made tweed suit enlivened by a gaudy tie. A bright gold
watch chain glitters from his waistcoat. All these sartorial touches make it hard to credit that
this can really be one of Sneaze’s friends.
     “Well, one gets on. Indeed, I’m now virtually obliged to sport such things as this. . .” Suzuki
seems a little self-conscious about the vulgarly fashionable display of his watch chain.
     “Is that thing real?” My master poses his question with the minimum of tact.
     “Solid gold. Eighteen carat,” Suzuki answers, smilingly smug. “You, too,” he continued,
“seem to have aged. Am I right in thinking you’ve children now? One? Am I right?”
     “No.”
     “Two?”
     “No.”
     “What, more? Three, then, is it?”
     “Yes, I have three children now, and I don’t know how many more to come in the future.”
     “Still as whimsical as ever. How old is your eldest? Quite big, I suppose.”
     “Yes, I’m not quite sure how old, but probably six or seven.”
     Suzuki laughed. “It must be pleasant to be a teacher, everything so free and easy. I wish I
too had taken up teaching.”
     “Just you try. You’d be sorry in three days.”
     “I don’t know. It seems a good kind of life: refined and not too stressful, plenty of spare
time, and the opportunity to really study one’s own special interest. Being a businessman is not
bad, either, though at my present level things aren’t particularly satisfactory. If one becomes a
businessman, one has to get to the top. Anywhere lower on the ladder, you have to go around
spouting idiotic flatteries and drinking saké with the boss when there’s nothing you want less.
Altogether, it’s a stupid way of life.”
     “Ever since my school days I’ve always taken a scunner to businessmen. They’ll do
anything for money. They are, after all, what they used to be called in the good old days: the
very dregs of society.” My master, with a businessman right there in front of him, indulges in
tactlessness.
     “Oh, have a heart. They aren’t always like that. Admittedly, there’s a certain coarseness
about them; for there’s no point in even trying to be a businessman unless your love for money
is so absolute that you’re ready to accompany it on the walk to a double suicide. For money,
believe you me, is a hard mistress and none of her lovers are let off lightly. As a matter of fact,
I’ve just been visiting a businessman and, according to him, the only way to succeed is to
practice the ‘triangled technique’: try to escape your obligations, annihilate your kindly feelings,
and geld yourself of the sense of shame. Try-an-geld. You get it? Jolly clever, don’t you think?”
     “What awful fathead told you that?”
     “He’s no fathead. Smart as a whip, in fact. And increasingly respected in business circles. I
rather fancy you know him. He lives up a side street just around the corner.”
     “You mean that frightful Goldfield?”
     “Goodness me, but you’re really getting worked up. He only meant it, you know, as a kind
of joke. It’s simply a way of summarizing the fact that to make money one must go through hell.
So please don’t take a joke too seriously.”
     “His ‘triangled technique’ may, I grant, be a joke: let’s say it’s screamingly funny. But what
about his wife and her nauseating nose? If you’ve been to their house you could hardly have
avoided colliding with that beak.”
     “Ah, Mrs. Goldfield. She seems a sensible woman of broad understanding.”
     “Damn her understanding. I’m talking about her nose. Her nose, Suzuki, it’s a positive
monstrosity. Only the other day I composed a haitai poem about it.”
     “What the dickens is a haitai poem?”
     “Do you mean to say you’ve never heard of the current experiments in the composition of
extended haiku?You do seem cut off from what’s going on in the world.”
     “True. When one is as busy as I am, it’s absolutely impossible to keep up with things like
literature. Anyway, even when a lad, I never liked it much.”
     “Are you aware of the shape of Charlemagne’s nose?”
     “You are indeed in a whimsical mood.” Suzuki laughed quite naturally. “Of course I haven’t
the faintest idea of the shape of Charlemagne’s nose.”
     “Well, what about Wellington then? His troops used to call him Nosey. Did you know that?”
     “Why on earth are you so batty about noses? Surely it doesn’t matter if a nose happens to
be round or pointed.”
     “On the contrary, it matters very much. D’you know about Pascal?”
     “Questions, questions! Am I supposed to be taking an exam or something? No, I don’t
know about Pascal. What did he do?”
     “He had this to say.”
     “What to say?”
     “‘Had Cleopatra’s nose been a little bit shorter, the history of the world would have been
changed.’”
     “Did he now!”
     “Perhaps now you see why one can’t afford to underestimate the importance of noses.”
     “All right, I’ll be more careful in future. By the way, I dropped in today because there’s
something I’d like to ask you. It’s about a chap you used to teach. Avalon something or other. I
can’t remember his other name, but I understand that you and he see a lot of each other.”
     “You mean Coldmoon?”
     “That’s it, Coldmoon. Well, I’ve really come to make enquiries about him.”
     “About a matrimonial matter?”
     “One might say that. You see, I called in earlier on the Goldfields. . .”
     “The Nose herself came sniffing round here only the other day.”
     “Did she? Well, as a matter of fact she mentioned that she’d called. She said she’d paid a
visit in order to present her respects to Mr. Sneaze and to entreat his assistance in a matter of
information, but that Waverhouse was present and made so many and such frivolous
interruptions that she just got muddled.”
     “It was all her own fault. Coming round here with a nose like that.”
     “She spoke of you with the deepest respect. She’s just regretful that the performance put
on by Waverhouse made it impossible to ask you certain personal questions about Coldmoon,
and she has therefore asked me to speak on her behalf. For what it’s worth, I’ve never before
played the part of an honest broker in matters of this sort, but if the two parties most directly
concerned are not against the idea, it’s not a bad thing to serve as a go-between and so bring
about a marriage. Indeed, that’s the reason for my present visit.”
     “How kind of you to call,” commented my master somewhat acidly.
     But, though he could not explain his feeling, he was inwardly a little moved by that phrase
about “the two parties most directly concerned.”
     Its slightly sentimental appeal made him feel as though a wraith of cool air had drifted
through his sleeves on a hot and humid summer’s night.
     It is true that my master’s character is based on so firm an inborn bedrock of cold reserve
and obstinacy that he is, by nature, one of this world’s wet blankets. Nevertheless, his nature is
of a completely different type from that of the vicious, heartless products of modern civilization.
The antique mold of his nature is clearly evidenced in the way in which he flares up at the
slightest provocation. The sole reason for his barney with Madam Conk was that he could not
stand her modern-day approach. But his flat dislike of the mother was no fault of her daughter.
     Similarly, because he abominates all businessmen, he finds Goldfield acutely distasteful:
yet here again, no blame can be laid on the daughter.
      Sneaze bears no real ill-will toward her, and Coldmoon is his favorite pupil and he loves that
lad more deeply than he would a brother. If Suzuki is correct in his statement that the two
parties most directly concerned do, in fact, love each other, then it would be an act unworthy of
a gentleman even indirectly to hinder true love’s course. Sneaze is quite convinced that he
himself is a gentleman, so his only remaining question is whether Coldmoon and Miss Goldfield
are in love. He must, if he is to amend his attitude, first be sure of the facts.
      “Tell me, does that girl really want to marry Coldmoon? I don’t care what Goldfield or the
Nose feel about the matter, but what are the girl’s own feelings?”
      “Well, you see. . . that is, I understand. . . well, yes, I suppose she does.” Suzuki’s answer
is not exactly clear-cut. Thinking that all he had to do was to find out more about Coldmoon, he
came unbriefed on Opula’s view of the match; so even this slippery lad now finds himself in a bit
of a jam.
      “The word ‘suppose’ implies some measure of uncertainty.” My master, tactless as ever
and not a man to be put off, goes in again like a bull at a gate.
      “True enough. Perhaps I should have expressed myself more clearly.
      Now, the daughter certainly has a certain inclination. Indeed, that’s true.
      What? Oh yes, Mrs. Goldfield told me so herself, though I gather she sometimes says
some awful things about Coldmoon.”
      “Who does? D’you mean the daughter?”
      “Yes.”
      “What impudence! That snip of a girl disparaging Coldmoon! Well, it can hardly mean that
she cares for him.”
      “But that’s just it. Odd you may think it, but sometimes people do run down precisely those
they love.”
      “I can’t conceive that anyone could be so deranged as to behave like that.” Such intricate
convolutions of human nature are quite beyond my master’s blunt and simple mind.
      “In fact the world is full of such people. Certainly that’s how Mrs.
      Goldfield interprets her daughter’s comments. She said to me ‘My daughter must be quite
taken with that young Coldmoon, for I’ve even heard her say he looks like a bewildered gourd.’”
      These revelations of the strangeness of the human heart leave my master dumbstruck.
Wide-eyed and wordless, he stares in astonishment at Suzuki as though he were some
soothsayer wandered in from the street. Suzuki seems to have the mind to sense the danger
implicit in my master’s unbelief and, fearful lest further discussion should wreck his whole
approach, quickly changes the subject to aspects of the matter which even my master cannot
fail to understand.
      “Consider these facts,” he said. “With her good looks and money that girl can marry almost
where she chooses. Now Coldmoon may be a splendid fellow, but comparing their relative
social positions. . . No, such comparisons are always odious and could be taken as offensive.
So let me put it this way: that, in terms of personal means, the couple are obviously ill-matched.
Surely then, you can see that if the Goldfields are so worried that they ask me to come round
here and talk to you, that very fact indicates the strength and nature of their daughter’s
yearnings?” One can’t deny Suzuki’s clever. He is relieved to notice that my master seems
impressed by his latest line of argument, but realizing that the question of the degree of
bleeding in Miss Goldfield’s heart is likely to be re-opened if he allows the conversation to loiter
on her feelings about Coldmoon, he concludes that the best way to complete his mission is to
drive the discussion forward as quickly as possible.
      “So, you see, as I’ve just explained, the Goldfields aren’t expecting money or property;
what they’d like instead is that Coldmoon should have some status of his own, and by status
they mean the public recognition of qualification that is symbolized in a senior degree. It’s not
that they’re so stuck-up as to say that they’ll only consider giving him their daughter if he holds
a doctorate. You mustn’t misunderstand them.
      Things got jumbled up the other day when Mrs. Goldfield called on you purely because
Waverhouse chose to amuse himself with his usual display of verbal fireworks and distorting
mirrors. No, no, please don’t protest. I know it was none of your fault. Mrs. Goldfield spoke in
admiration of you as a frank and honest man. I’m certain that the blame and any awkwardness
that may have arisen must be laid at Waverhouse’s door. Anyway, you see, the nub of the
matter is this: if Coldmoon can get a doctorate, he would have independent status. People
would naturally look up to Dr. Coldmoon, and the Goldfields would be proud of such a son-in-
law. So what are the chances of Coldmoon’s making an early submission of his thesis and
receiving his doctorate? You see, so far as the Goldfields themselves are concerned, they’d be
the last to demand a doctor’s degree, they wouldn’t even ask for a bachelor’s. But they have to
consider what the world and his wife will say, and when dealing with the world one simply
cannot be too careful.”
      So presented, the Goldfields’ request for a doctorate seems not altogether unreasonable,
and anything he deems not altogether unreasonable qualifies for my master’s support. He feels
inclined to act as Suzuki suggests. Suzuki, it is clear, can twiddle my master around his artful
little finger. I recognize my master as indeed a simple, honest man.
      “Well, in that case, next time Coldmoon drops around, I’ll urge him to get on with his thesis.
However, I feel that I must first question him closely to ascertain whether or not he really wants
to marry that Goldfield girl.”
      “Question him closely! If you act with such meticulous formality, the business will never get
settled. The quickest way to a happy ending is to sound his mind, casually, in the course of an
ordinary conversation.”
      “To sound his mind?”
      “Yes, but perhaps the word ‘sound’ is not quite right since it can be thought to smack of
indirection. Of course I’m not suggesting deception of any kind. What I mean is that you would
understand the drift of his mind in this matter from simply talking with him about generalities.”
      “You might understand, but I wouldn’t unless I ask him point-blank.”
      “Ah well, I suppose that’s up to you. But I don’t think it would be reasonable to ruin a
romance by slinging cold water on it, quite unnecessarily and even for fun, like Waverhouse.
Perhaps one doesn’t need actually to jostle them into marriage, but surely in matters of this
sort, the two parties most directly concerned should be left undistracted by irrelevant outside
influences to settle their future for themselves. So next time Coldmoon calls, try, please, not to
interfere. Of course I don’t mean you yourself. I’m referring to Waverhouse; nobody emerges
scatheless whom Waverhouse discusses.” Since Suzuki could not very well speak ill of my
master, he spoke thus bitterly against Waverhouse, when, talk of the devil, who should come
floating unexpectedly in on a spring breeze through the kitchen but Waverhouse himself.
      “Hello,” he said, throwing the accent onto the second syllable, “a visitor from the past! I
haven’t seen you in years. You know,” he rattled on,
      “Sneaze treats intimate friends like me with scant ceremony. Shocking behavior! One ought
to visit him roughly once a decade. Those sweets, for instance, you wouldn’t get those if you
called here often.” Scanting all ceremony,Waverhouse reaches over and crams his mouth with a
large piece of red-bean sugar-paste confection from the well-known Fujimura shop. Suzuki
fidgets. My master grins. Waverhouse munches. As from the veranda I watched this interlude, I
realized that good theater need not depend upon speech, that high dramatic effect can be
achieved with mime. The Zen sect practices instantaneous mental communication of truth from
mind to mind in dialogues of silence. The dumb show going on within the room is, no doubt, a
version of that practice; and the dialogue, though brief is pretty sharply worded. It was, of
course, Waverhouse who broke the silence.
     “I’d thought, Suzuki, that you’d become a bird of permanent passage, always coming or
going somewhere, but I see you’ve landed back. The longer one lives, the greater the chance
that something odd will turn up.” Waverhouse babbles away to Suzuki with that same complete
absence of reserve which characterizes his conversations with my master. Though they lodged
together in their student days, still it would be normal for a man to address someone whom he
hasn’t seen for at least ten years with a little more formality. Except when that man is
Waverhouse. That he pays not the least regard to the requirements of convention marks him
out as either a superior soul or a rightdown job-bernowl. But which one cannot say.
     “That’s a little hard. Aren’t you being a trifle pessimistic,” commented Suzuki
noncommittally, but his way of fingering his watch-chain betrayed a continuing unease.
     “Tell me, have you ever ridden on a tram?” My master shot this sudden and peculiar enquiry
at Suzuki.
     “It seems that I’ve come here today simply to provide you two city-wits with a
laughingstock on which to hone your singular sense of humor. Though it’s true that I’m very
much up from the provinces, I actually happen to own some sixty shares in the Tram Company
of your precious city.”
     “Well, that’s not to be sneezed at! I myself once used to own eight hundred and eighty-
eight and a half of them. But I’m sorry to say that the vast majority have now been eaten by
insects, so that I’ve nothing but one single half-share left. If you’d come up to Tokyo a little bit
earlier, I would gladly have given you some ten shares that, until very recently, the moths had
not yet got at. What a sad misfortune.”
     “I see you haven’t changed your personal style of ridicule. But joking apart, you’re bound to
do well if you just hang on to stocks of that quality. They cannot fail, year after year, to climb in
value.”
     “Quite right. Even half a share, provided one holds it for roughly a thousand years, will end
up making you so rich you’ll need three stron-grooms. You and I, razor-minded fellows with our
senses keyed to the economic inwardness of these stirring times, are, of course, keenly
conscious of the significance of stocks. But what about poor Sneaze? Just look at him. To him,”
said Waverhouse, conferring on my master a look of withering pity, “stocks are no more than
some vague kind of gillyflower.” He helped himself to another piece of confectionery. His
appetite is contagious, for my master, too, stretches out his arm toward the sweet dish. It is in
the immutable nature of the human world that positivity should triumph, that initiative be aped.
     “I do not care two hoots about stocks or shares, but I do wish poor old Sorosaki had lived
to ride, if only once, on a tram.” With morose concentration my master studies the pattern cut
by his teeth in his half-eaten sweet.
     “Had Sorosaki ever got into a tram, sure as egg is egg, he’d have finished up at the end of
the line in Shinagawa. He was an absent-minded man. He’s better off where he is now,
engraved upon a weight-stone as Mr. the-late-and-sainted Natural Man. At least he knows
where he is.”
     “I’d heard that Sorosaki had died. I’m sorry. He was a brainy chap,” says Suzuki.
     “Brainy, all right,”Waverhouse chipped in, “but when it came to cooking rice he was a
positive imbecile. Every time it came round to Sorosaki’s turn to do the cooking, I contrived to
keep body and soul together by eating out on noodles.”
     “True, Sorosaki’s rice had the peculiar characteristics of smelling burnt yet being
undercooked. I, too, used to suffer. What’s more, he had an odd way with the accompanying
bean-curds. Uncooked and so cold that one could not eat them.” Suzuki dredges up a grievance
ten years old.
     “Even in those days Sneaze was Sorosaki’s closest friend. They used to trot off together
every evening to gulp down rice-cakes swamped in red-bean soup, and, as a proper and
inevitable result, Sneaze is now a martyr to dyspepsia. As a matter of fact, since it was Sneaze
who always guzzled most, he should by rights have predeceased his crony.”
     “What extraordinary chains of logic do run around in your contraption of a mind. Anyway,”
remarked my master, “there was nothing particularly reprehensible about my going out for
sweet-bean soup. As I remember it, your own evening expeditions took the form of haunting a
graveyard in order to beat up tombstones with a bamboo stick. You called it physical exercise,
but that didn’t save you from a right old rap on the knuckles when the priest came out and
caught you.” In this exchange of student reminiscence I thought my master’s counter-swipe with
the tombstones far more telling than that dribble of soup from Waverhouse. Indeed, by his
laughter,Waverhouse himself acknowledged the defeat.
     “Indeed,” he said, “I well remember that priest. He told me I was thumping on the noddles
of the dear departed, which would disturb their sleep. So, would I please desist. All I did was to
make some practice passes with a bamboo wand, but General Suzuki here, training his body
with wrestlers’ drills, engaged those stones in violent personal combat. I recall that on one
occasion he wrestled loose and overthrew three monuments of assorted sizes.”
     “That did annoy the priest. He got quite fierce about it, insisting I restore my victims to their
original positions. I asked him to hold his horses for a moment while I went and hired some
navvies for the job, but he wouldn’t hear of it. ‘Navvies,’ he said, ‘won’t do. Only your own hands
can purge the evil they have done. The dead will accept no penitence but yours.’”
     “And what a sight you were! Moaning and groaning through those muddy puddles in a
calico shirt and a loincloth tied with string. . .”
     “And I remember you, with a coldly serious face you stood and sketched me as I struggled
with those goddam stones. Such utter heartlessness. I’m very slow to anger, but at that time,
from the bottom of my heart, I ached to kill you for your insultingly dispassionate detachment.
     I can still remember what you said that day. Can you, I wonder?”
     “How could anyone remember what was said ten years ago. I do, however, recall the
words engraved on one of the stones: Returning Fountain Hall, Lord Yellow Crane the Great
Deceased, January 1776.
     The stone, moreover, was antique and elegant. I was tempted to make off with it. Its
general style was Gothic and chimed entrancingly with those aesthetic principles I cherish.”
Waverhouse is off again, flaunting his gimcrack knowledge of aesthetics. Whoever heard of
Japanese Gothic from 1776. . .
     “That’s as may be, but listen to what you said. These are your very words. ‘Since I propose
to devote my days to the study of aesthetics, I must, for future reference, grasp each and
every opportunity to set down upon paper any event of interest in this universe which comes
before my eyes.’What’s more, you were kind enough to dispassionately add ‘A man such as I,
one totally and exclusively committed to the pursuit of learning, cannot permit himself the luxury
of such personal feelings as those of pity or compassion.’ I could have done you in for such
nonchalance. But all I did, in fact, was to grab your sketchbook with my muddied hands and rip
the thing to ribbons.”
     “And it was from precisely that moment that my talent as a creative artist, up until then
widely accepted as remarkably promising, was nipped in the bud, never to bloom again. I have
my own whole skeleton of bones still to pick with you.”
     “Don’t be so daft. If anyone’s entitled to a grudge, it’s me.”
     “Waverhouse, from as far back as my mind can reach, has always been a windbag.” My
master, having munched his sweet to extinction, rejoins the conversation. “He never means
what he says and has never been known to keep a promise. Pressed hard for an explanation,
he never apologizes but trots out endless pretexts and prevarications. Once when the myrtles
were in bloom in the temple yard, he told me that he would complete a treatise he was writing,
on those same old cherished principles of aesthetics, before the flowers fell. ‘Impossible,’ I
said. Can you guess his answer? He claimed, despite appearances, to be of iron will.‘If you
doubt my word,’ he said, ‘just name your bet.’ I took him up on it and we agreed that the loser
should stand a dinner at a Western restaurant over in Kanda. I took the bet because I was
certain that he’d never get his writing done in time, but I confess that, not in fact having the cash
to pay for the dinner if I lost, I remained a little nervous that he still might work a miracle.
Anyway, he showed no signs of getting down to work. A week went by, three weeks went by,
and still he hadn’t written a single page. At last the flowers of the myrtle fell, and, though the
tree stood empty, Waverhouse stood calm. Looking forward to my Western meal, I pressed
our friend to meet his obligation. Not to put too fine a point upon his answer, he told me to get
lost.”
     “No doubt,” chimed in Suzuki, “he offered this, that and the other reason?”
     “Indeed he did, the barefaced rogue. You can’t imagine how obstinate he was. ‘Say what
you will,’ he said, ‘about my other flaws and faults. I admit them all, and readily. But the fact
remains that in strength of will I’m stronger than the pack of you.’”
     “Do you mean,” asked Waverhouse himself, “that, having written nothing, I still claimed not
to have lost the bet?”
     “Of course you did. You said the bet was not about finishing the treatise but about your iron
will. And in respect of that iron quality, so you most willfully informed me, you would yield to
none. You conceded that your memory might be poor; so poor indeed that you had next day
forgotten that you intended to write a paper on the principles of aesthetics; but you maintained
that your will to write it remained ferric to the core. The fault lay in your memory, not in your
will. So, though the myrtle flowers were fallen and the treatise still unwritten, you made it
painfully clear that you saw no reason why you should come across with my dinner.”
     “Now that’s very interesting. And so very typical of Waverhouse.” I can’t see what in that
rather tedious story should so particularly interest Suzuki, but the tone of his comments is
markedly different from that which he used before Waverhouse came in. Perhaps such
variousness is a sign of a clever man.
     “Not in the least interesting.” My master interjects a sharpish contradiction.
     “It distresses me that you should still be feeling so put out about it, but is it not for that very
reason that I’ve had men out with lanterns searching high and low for those peacocks’ tongues I
promised you?
     Don’t be so huffy, Sneaze. Just wait a while and all shall be made up.
     Incidentally, this talk about writing a treatise reminds me that I’ve called today with some
especially odd news.”
     “Since you bring round odd news every time you visit, I’ll take that statement with a pinch of
salt.”
     “But today’s odd news truly is sensational. Cross my heart and hope to die, it’s stunning.
Coldmoon’s started writing his thesis. What about that? Since in his own quaint way Coldmoon
has a fairly elevated opinion of himself, I wouldn’t have expected him to engage in such a
mundane, tasteless chore as getting a thesis actually written, but it appears that he, too, is
tainted with wordly ambition. Now don’t you think that odd? You’d better let that Goldfield
woman know that she may now start dreaming of decking her family tree with a full-blown
doctor of acorns.”
     At the first mention of Coldmoon’s name, Suzuki begins jerking his chin and twitching his
eyes at my master in silent pleas that nothing should be said of their recent conversation. My
master fails to notice these entreating galvanisms. A short while back, under the suasion of
Suzuki’s moral lecture, he had felt sufficiently sorry for the love-lorn daughter not to indulge his
unabated antipathy toward her mother. But as soon as Waverhouse referred to Madam Conk,
his recollection of his recent row with that virago came flooding back in full spate. That the row
had had its comic aspects did not make it any the less provoking. But the news that Coldmoon
had started to write his thesis, that was really marvelous. He was grateful to Waverhouse, who
had more than fulfilled his boast of having something startling to say, for bringing such a
welcome present. It was, indeed, a stunning piece of news; stunning but singularly pleasant. It
doesn’t greatly matter, one way or the other, whether Coldmoon marries the girl, but it is
certainly an excellent thing for the lad to get his doctorate. In surprising ways my master knows
himself, and would with absolute humility accept that not a tear need fall if a botched wooden
statue is left undecorated to rot away in some dark back-corner of a sculptor’s shop. But when
a statue is superbly carved, when its basic quality is noble, then no effort should be spared and
no time wasted in ensuring that it be given gilding of appropriate splendor.
     “Are you really telling me that Coldmoon’s started writing?” my master enquires eagerly
and paying no attention at all to the jittering Suzuki.
     “What a suspicious mind you’ve got! Don’t you ever believe what I tell you? Yes, he’s
started, but I regret I cannot tell you whether his thesis will be concerned with the stability of
acorns or with the mechanics of hanging. Whatever the subject, a Coldmoon thesis must be a
glorious snub for the Nose.”
     Suzuki has been getting more and more restive as Waverhouse repeats and develops his
discourteous references to Madam Conk;Waverhouse, not noticing, sails unconcernedly on.
     “I have,” he said, “carried out some further research into noses and am happy to advise
you of an interesting treatment of the subject in the Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy,
Gentleman. Had Sterne but known of that mountain of relevant material, how greatly it would
have helped him. The sadness of chronology! To think that that staggering organ, eminently
qualified as it is to gain immortal nose-fame, should be born, like many another nosegay, to
blush unseen! One’s heart is filled with an immense compassion. When next it thrusts itself upon
us, I shall sketch that vast promontory of flesh for my future reference in the study of
aesthetics.” There’s no restraining Waverhouse.
     “But I hear that the Goldfield girl is yearning to be Coldmoon’s bride.” My master makes a
fair summary of Suzuki’s representations, while the latter, annoyance twitching from every
feature on his face and electric messages flashing from his eyes, signals desperately for
disengagement. My master, like some nonconducting substance, remains immune to these
distraught discharges.
     “How bizarre. It strains the mind to think that the daughter of such a man might fall in love. .
. Not, I would imagine, that it could be love of any quality, just rubbing noses.”
     “Whatever its nature,” my master commented, “let’s hope that Coldmoon marries her.”
     “What’s that?” said Waverhouse. “Who’s now hoping Coldmoon marries her? Only the other
day you were dead against such a disastrous match. Have you gone soft or something?”
     “It’s not a matter of going soft. I never go soft, but. . .”
     “But something’s happened? That’s it, isn’t it? Now look here, Suzuki, since you’re some
kind of lower life-form in the business jungle, let me give a piece of advice to guide your future
slitherings. It’s with reference to that grunting Goldfield and his piglet daughter. The idea that
reasonable persons might be called upon to treat that creature with the respect due to the wife
of Mr. Avalon Coldmoon, that talented national figure, why, man, the thing’s impossible. They’d
no more balance each other than would a paper-lantern and a big bronze bell. No one who calls
himself a friend to Coldmoon could stand by and not speak against the folly of such a
misalliance. Surely, Suzuki, even you, looking at it as a businessman, can see the sense in what
I’m saying.”
     “What a kerfuffle you do still manage to kick up! Always something stirring, eh? You haven’t
changed one little bit in all of these ten years.
     Really, it’s remarkable.” Suzuki tries to slither round the question.
     “Since you compliment me as being remarkable, let me display some more remarkable
dollops of learning appropriate to this case. The ancient Greeks set very high store by physical
prowess and encouraged its pursuit by awarding valuable prizes to the winners of all sorts of
athletic contests. But, strangely enough, there is no record that they ever offered prizes for
intellectual prowess. Until recently this curious circumstance incessantly puzzled me.”
     “I see,” says Suzuki still trying to make himself agreeable. “That does seem odd.”
     “However, just the other day, I chanced, in the course of my researches into aesthetics, to
light upon the explanation. Years of accumulated worrying fell instantly away from me and, in
that blessed trice, as though disburdened of all errors and earthly delusions, I found myself
transported to that pure realm of infinite enlightenment where my soul rejoiced in its
transcendence of the world and its attainment of pansophic self-awareness.”Waverhouse
departs on such a flight of gongoristic drivel that even the toadying Suzuki allows his face to slip
into the lineaments of having had enough. “He’s at it again” may be read in my master’s
resigned expression as, with eyes cast down, he sits there tapping, kan-kan-kan, on the rim of
the cake-dish with his ivory chopsticks.
     Nowise disconcerted,Waverhouse blathers on.
     “And to whom do you think we are indebted for that brilliant logical analysis, which, by its
simple explanation of this seeming anomaly, has rescued us forever from the dark abyss of
doubt? It was that famous Greek philosopher, the greatest of all scholars since scholarship
began, the renowned founder of the Peripatetic School, Aristotle himself. His explanation—I
say, Sneaze, please stop flogging that cake-dish and pay a little more attention—may be
summarized thus. The prizes awarded at Greek contests were worth more than the
performances that earned them, for the prizes were intended not only to stimulate effort but to
reward achievement. Consequently, if one were to give a prize for intellectual prowess, for
knowledge itself, one would have to find something to award which was more valuable than
knowledge. But knowledge already is the rarest gem in the world. The Greeks, unwilling to
debase the value of knowledge, piled up chests all crammed with gold to the height of Mount
Olympus. They gathered in the wealth of Croesus, and wealth beyond that wealth, but in the
end they recognized that the value of knowledge cannot be matched, let alone exceeded. So,
masters of reason that they were, they decided that the prize should be nothing at all. From
this, Suzuki, I trust you will have learnt that, whatever the color of your money, it is worthless
stuff compared with learning. Let us accordingly apply this revealed truth, this fundamental
principle, to the particular problem that has arisen today. Surely you’re bound to see that
Goldfield’s merely a paper man, a bill of exchange with eyes and a nose scrawled onto it. If I
may put it epigrammatically, the man’s no more than an animated banknote. And if he’s money
in motion, currency one might say, his daughter’s nothing but a circulating promissory note. In
contrast, now, let us consider Coldmoon. With consummate ease he graduated with the best
degree of his year from the highest seat of learning in our land. On leaving the Imperial
University, he showed no sign of slackening of effort. On the contrary, fiddling with the antique
fastening-strings of his short surcoat, he devotes himself both day and night to intensive study
of the thorny problem of the stability of acorns. And in addition to all that, this indefatigable
servant of learning is just about to publish a thesis which, unquestionably, will embody
intellectual concepts beside whose depth, originality, and scope those adumbrated by the great
Lord Kelvin must pale into insignificance. It is true he was concerned in an abortive attempt at
suicide, but that was no more than a passing fancy of a kind common among lads of spirit.
Certainly the incident can cast no serious doubt upon his reputation as a vast repository of
learning and intelligence. If I may adapt to Coldmoon’s case one of my own earlier turns of
phrase, I should describe him as a circulating library. He is a high-explosive shell, perhaps only
a twenty-eight centimeter, but compactly charged with knowledge.
     And when at the properly chosen time this projectile makes its impact upon the world of
learning, then, if it detonates, detonate it will.”
     Waverhouse, unbelievably, seems to have run out of steam. Confused by his own jumble of
metaphors, he almost flinches, and his flow of language peters pointlessly out. As the saying
goes, the dragon’s head of his opening remarks has dwindled down to a snake’s tail of an
ending.
     However, though Waverhouse may falter, he’s unlikely to shut up. In a matter of seconds
he’s off again.
     “In that inevitable explosion things like promissory notes, though there be thousands of
them, will all be blasted into dust. It follows that, for Coldmoon, such a female simply will not
do. I cannot consent to so ill-suited an alliance. It would be as though an elephant, that wisest
and most noble of all animals, were to marry the greediest piglet of a greedy farrow.” With a
final burst of speed Waverhouse breasts the tape. “That’s so, isn’t it, Sneaze?” My master,
silent, resumed his melancholy tapping on the cake-dish.
     Looking a bit depressed and obviously at his wit’s end for a suitable answer, Suzuki
mumbles something about not being able to entirely agree.
     His position is, indeed, delicate. His hands, as it were, are still wet with blood from his
verbal assassination, barely a half-hour back, of Waverhouse’s character, and a man as
outrageously tactless as my master might, at any moment, come straight out with anything.
Suzuki’s soundest tactic is to receive, and if possible smother, the Waverhouse attack, and
then, in the general confusion, to wriggle away to safety as quickly as he can. Suzuki’s
clever.Very much a man cast in the modern mold, he seeks to avoid head-on collisions and
considers it positively medieval to enter into arguments that, of their nature, can have no
practical result. In his opinion the purpose of life is not to talk, but to act. If events develop as
one wishes, then life, its purpose thus fulfilled, is good. But if events not only develop as one
wishes but do so without difficulties, fret, or altercation, then life, its purpose slitheringly fulfilled,
is paradisal. Suzuki’s unwavering devotion to this Elysian principle of slithering had brought him
great success in the business world he’d entered after graduating from the university. It had
brought him a watch of eighteen-carat gold. It had brought him a request from the Goldfields
that he should do them a small favor.
     It had even enabled him to maneuver Sneaze nine-tenths of the way toward doing what the
Goldfields wished. Then Waverhouse descends upon the scene. Out of the ordinary, careless
of all conventions, totally eccentric, he manifests himself as an incarnation of capriciousness
operating in accordance with a psychological pattern never previously observed in the human
creature. No wonder that Suzuki feels a bit bewildered. Though Suzuki’s principle was invented
by a variety of clever gentlemen seeking success in Meiji circumstances, its prime practitioner
is Suzuki Tōjūrō himself, and it is consequently he who is most signally stumped when the
principle proves inapplicable.
     “It’s only because you’re out of your depth,”Waverhouse pressed on,
     “that you sit there looking supercilious and offer no more useful contribution than the cool
comment that you can’t entirely agree. But if you’d been here the other day when that Nose
came throwing her weight around, even you, businessman to the backbone though you are,
even you would have felt like throwing up. It’s true, Sneaze, isn’t it? Go on, tell him. I thought
you handled the situation magnificently.”
     “But I’m told,” my master almost smirked, “that my conduct on that occasion created a
more favorable impression than did yours.”
     The answering laugh was a mixture of pity and scorn. “What incredible self-confidence! I
begin to understand how you manage to sail along at school unperturbed by the mockery of
your colleagues and your pupils’ shouts of Savage Tea. In matters of willpower I’m a match for
anyone, but when it comes to sheer nerve, I’m just not even in your class. I humble myself in
the presence of such staggering self-confidence.”
     “Why on earth should I be moved by such puerile carryings-on? Their grumbles don’t scare
me. Though Sainte-Beuve was perhaps the greatest of all critics, his lectures at the Sorbonne
proved so unpopular that, whenever he walked in the streets, he was obliged to carry a dagger
up his sleeve to defend himself against attacks from students. Similarly, when Brunetière’s
lectures attacked the novels of Zola. . .”
     “Come off it, Sneaze. You’re not a professor or a university lecturer.
     For a mere teacher of the English Reader to start comparing himself with world-famous
professors is like a minnow demanding to be treated as a whale. If you keep on saying things
like that, you’re bound to be laughed at.”
     “That’s just your opinion. As I see it, Sainte-Beuve and I, considered as scholars, are of
roughly the same standard.”
     “What fantastic self-esteem! But if I were you, I’d give up any idea of going around with a
dagger. You might cut yourself. Of course, if university professors do go armed with dirks, it
might be reasonable for a teacher of the English Reader to carry a folding penknife. But even
so, any edged tool is dangerous. What you ought to do is to toddle along to the Nakamise
arcade down in Asakusa and get yourself a toy pop-gun.
     You could carry it slung from your shoulder. You’d make a charming picture. What d’you
think, Suzuki?”
     Suzuki’s feeling better. Relieved that the conversation has at long last veered away from
the subject of the Goldfields, he feels it safe to venture a few, and preferably flattering,
sentences.
     “As it always was, it’s been great fun to take part again in such a lively but good-natured
discussion. Not having seen you two for a full ten years, I feel as though I had just walked back
into a spacious sunny landscape out of some dark and narrow alley. As you’ll understand,
conversations among business associates tend to be pretty tricky. One has to watch one’s
step, constantly minding one’s p’s and q’s, and ever alert for a stab in the back. The never-
ending worry and strain is genuinely painful. But I myself enjoy frank and open conversation,
and it’s marvelous to be talking again with one’s student-chums in the same old style of
uninhibited honesty. I’m delighted that my visit brought me the added and unexpected pleasure
of running into Waverhouse. Well,” he concluded, “I must leave you now. I’ve got a man to
meet.”
     Having delivered himself of these slithery sentences, Suzuki was beginning to lever himself
loose from my cushion, when Waverhouse remarked, “I’ll come along, too. They’re waiting for
me at the Entertainment Temperance Union over in Nihombashi. Let’s run along together.”
     “Fine,” said Suzuki. “Part of the way we’ll be going in the same direction.” So, arm in arm,
they left.
                                                 II



         O WRITE down every event that takes place during a period of twenty-four hours, and

T        then to read that record would, I think, occupy at least another twenty-four hours.
         Though I am all in favor of realistically descriptive literature, I must confess that to make
         a literal record of all that happened in a day and a night would be a tour de force quite
beyond the capacities of a cat. Therefore, however much my master’s paradoxical words and
eccentric acts may merit being sketched from life at length and in exhaustive detail, I regret that
I have neither the talent nor the energy to set them all down for my readers. Regrettable as it
is, it simply can’t be helped. Even a cat needs rest.
      After Suzuki and Waverhouse had taken their departure, it became as quiet as a night when
winter’s icy wind suddenly drops and the snow falls soundlessly. My master, as usual, shuts
himself up in his study. In their six-mat sleeping-room, side-by-side in a bumpy row, the children
lie asleep. Mrs. Sneaze in the adjoining room, a room that faces south, lies in bed giving suck to
Menko, her one-year-old baby daughter. It has been a hazy day of the type we often get in
springtime, and dusk has fallen early. The sound of wooden clogs passing in front of the house
can be heard quite distinctly in the living room and the sound of a Chinese flute, played in
random snatches by someone in the boarding-house on the next street, falls lullingly in broken
drifts upon my sleepy ears.
      Outside it must still be hazy. Having filled my stomach with that dinner of rice with fish gravy
which O-san had provided in my abalone-shell, I feel that a little shut-eye is precisely what I
need.
      It has come to my ears that haiku poets have taken to using the phrase “cat’s love” as a
means of indicating that a poem is concerned with the season of spring. Indeed, I have myself
observed that there are nights in early spring when my fellow cats in this neighborhood set up
such a cat-erwauling that sleep is well-nigh impossible. As it happens, I personally have not yet
experienced such a derangement of my senses.
      Nevertheless, love is a universal stimulant. It is the way of all things, from Olympian Zeus
right down to the very humblest of the earth-worms and mole-crickets that chirrup on this earth,
to wear themselves out in this exhausting field of endeavor. It is, therefore, only natural that
cats, too, dreamily joyful, should indulge themselves in the risk-fraught search for love. Indeed,
on looking back, I remember that I myself once pined away for love of Tortoiseshell. I hear that
even Opula, that gormandizer of rice-cakes dusted with bean-flour, that daughterly extension of
the very baseline of the triangled technique, old man Goldfield, I hear that even she is smitten
with love for the unlikely person of Coldmoon. I, consequently, would not dream of sneering at
those tomcats and their lady consorts who, throughout the whole wide world, are so inspired by
the ineffable magic of these evenings of the spring that they run amuck under the excruciations
of their lusts and loneliness.
      However, and to my infinite regret, even when invited to participate, I just don’t have the
urge. In my present condition all that I need is rest.
     I am so utterly sleepy that I simply couldn’t perform. Accordingly, I sidle sluggishly around
the children’s bedding, set paw on that forbidden territory at the end where their own feet lie
and, finding a suitable space, curl up comfortably and drop off into slumber.
     I happen to open my eyes and, looking round, find that my master is lying asleep inside the
bedding spread beside his wife’s. When he goes to bed, it is his invariable habit to bring along
some small Western book from his collection, but I’ve never seen him actually read so much as
two consecutive pages. Sometimes he just brings the book, places it beside his pillow, and
makes no faintest attempt to read it. Though it seems peculiarly unnecessary to bring a book of
which not one line will be read, such actions are quite typical of my master. However much his
wife laughs at him, however suasively she begs him to give up this stupid habit, still he persists.
Every evening he makes a point of going to bed with a book which he does not read.
Sometimes he makes a positive beast of himself and shuffles in with three or four books tucked
under his arms. For several days until a little while ago, it was his nightly practice to tote in
Webster’s whacking great dictionary. I suppose this behavior reflects some kind of
psychological ailment. Just as some men of peculiarly extravagant taste can only get to sleep
to the gentle simmering singing of one of Ryūbundō’s special iron kettles, so too, perhaps, my
master cannot sleep without a book beside his pillow. It would seem that for my master a book
is not a thing to be read, but a device to bring on slumber: a typographical sleeping-pill, a
paginated security-blanket.
     I take a peep to see what he’s brought tonight and find that he’s fallen asleep with a slim,
red volume lying half-open on his chin, with its top edge almost brushing his moustache. Judging
by the fact that his left-hand thumb is sandwiched between the pages, he must tonight have
made a praiseworthy improvement on his usual performance to the extent of reading at least a
line or two. Beside the bed, in its accustomed place, its cold, gray surface a dull reflection of
this warm spring night, his nickel watch lies gleaming.
     My master’s wife, the nursling baby tumbled about a foot away from her, lies open-
mouthed and snoring. Her head has slipped down from the pillow. In my opinion, there is
nothing more unbecoming in the human type than its indecent habit of sleeping with the mouth
left open.
     Never in a lifetime would a cat be caught in such degenerate conduct.
     The mouth and the nose have their separate functions: the former is provided for the
making of sounds and the latter for respiratory purposes.
     However, in northern lands the human creature has grown slothful and opens its mouth as
seldom and as little as possible. One obvious result of this muscular parsimony is that northern
style of tight-lipped speech in which the words would seem to be enunciated through the
nostrils.
     That is bad, but it’s even worse when the nose is kept closed and the mouth assumes the
respiratory function. The result is not only unsightly, but could indeed, when rat shit drops from
the rafters, involve real risk to health.
     As for the children, they too, small-scale reproductions of the indignities of their parents, lie
sprawled about on their bedding. Tonko, the elder daughter, as if to demonstrate the monstrous
regiment of elder sisters, lies with her right arm stretched out full so that her fist is firmly
planted against her sister’s ear. In a kind of sleeping counterattack, Sunko lies flat on her back
with one leg flung across her elder’s stomach. Both have managed to revolve through ninety
degrees since, properly positioned, they drifted off to sleep. But, perfectly at ease in their
unnatural dispositions, they slumber deeply on.
      There is something peculiarly moving about the faint illumination of a night-lamp in the dark
hours of the spring. Over the unpretentious, but sadly inelegant interior-scene of our dwelling, it
casts a flickering radiance so sweet and gentle that it seems to be inviting our gladdest
marvelment at the beauty of this night. Wondering what the time is, I look around the room.
Dead silence reigns, broken only by the ticking of the wall clock, the snores of Mrs. Sneaze,
and, despite the distance, the relentless grinding of the servant’s teeth. Whenever they tell that
Osan woman of her grinding ways, she swears it isn’t true. Obstinately, flatly, she takes her
oath that, never from the day since she was born, not that many babies turn up tusked, has she
ever ground a tooth. She neither apologizes nor attempts to break the habit, just stubbornly
insists that she doesn’t remember ever having done such a thing. Since she does it in her sleep,
it’s probably true that she doesn’t remember doing it. But facts, remembered or not, are all,
alas, still facts. There are persons in this world who, having perpetrated villainies, remain
assured of their own absolute saintliness. They really do convince themselves that they’re pure
of any guilt. Such utter self-deception is, I dare say, a form of simple-mindedness, but however
genuine the self-deception, if the actuality is objectionable to other people it should be put
down. As I lay there thinking that there’s no real difference between our grinding skivvy and
those evil-doing gentlefolk who think themselves so righteous, the night wore peacefully on.
      Suddenly I hear a light double-tapping on the wooden shutters of the kitchen entrance.
Odd. People would hardly come visiting at this time of the night. It must be one of those
damnable rats. So let it bump. As I mentioned earlier, I long ago decided never to catch rats.
Then, once again, I heard a double-tapping. Somehow it doesn’t sound like a rat. If it is a rat, it
must be an extremely cautious one. For the rats in my master’s house, like the students at his
school, devote their entire energies, both day and night, to the practice of riotous behavior and
seem to believe that they were only brought into this world to disrupt as violently as possible
the dopey dreamings of that pitiable man. No rat of ours would make such modest noises. No,
it is not a rat. Far too timid.
      The other night we had a rat come boldly into my master’s bedroom, nip off a snippet from
the tip of his already stunted nose and then depart in squeaking triumph. It just can’t be a rat.
As if to confirm my suspicions, the next sound that I hear is the scraping creak of the wooden
shutter being lifted from its groove, and then I hear the sliding screen being eased sideways as
quietly as possible. Beyond all doubt, it’s not a rat. It can then but be human. Even Waverhouse
or Suzuki would hesitate at this late hour to lift the latch and walk in unannounced, and neither, I
think would go so far as to dismantle a wooden shutter. Could it, I wonder, be one of those
gentleman-burglars of whom I’ve heard so much? If it really is a burglar, I’d like to see what he
looks like.
      As far as I can judge, two steps with muddy feet have so far been taken across the kitchen
floor. The third step must have been planted on one of the removable floorboards for there was
a sharp thwacking sound loud enough to echo through the silence of the night. I feel as if the fur
on my back were being rubbed in the wrong direction with a boot brush. For a while there was
no further sound, not even the stealthiest footstep. Mrs. Sneaze snores gently on, sucking in
and blowing out through her gaping gob the beneficent air of this peaceful era. My master is
probably dreaming some dream in which his thumb is trapped in a scarlet book. After a while,
there comes the sound of a match being struck in the kitchen. Even a gentleman-thief cannot,
as I can, see in the dark. It must be very inconvenient for him.
      At this point I crouched well down and tried to work out what moves the intruder would next
make. Will he proceed hither from the kitchen by way of the living room, or will he, turning left
through the hall, make his way to the study? I hear the sound of a sliding door, and then
footsteps on the veranda. He’s gone to the study. Dead silence followed.
      It then occurred to me that it would be kind, while there was still time, to wake my master
and his wife. But how? A few impractical notions spin around inside my skull like water-wheels,
but I am not visited with any sensible ideas. It struck me that I might possibly rouse them by
tugging at the bedcovers. Two or three times I tried, worrying away at the lower end of the
material, but my efforts had no effect. I then thought I might do better if I rubbed my wet cold
nose against my master’s cheek. I accordingly put my muzzle to his face, but all I got for my
trouble was a sharp smack in the snoot. He didn’t even wake but, lifting his arm in his sleep,
rapped me hard on the nose. The nose, even in cats, is a vulnerable area and I suffered
agonies. Nevertheless, I persisted. Since I could think of nothing else, I tried miaowing at them.
      Indeed I tried. At least twice, but somehow my throat just failed to function and no sound
emerged. When at long last, and by enormous self-discipline I did manage to emit a single
feeble mew, I was quickly shocked back into silence. For, though my master continued just to
lie there like a log, suddenly I heard the interloper once more on the move.
      I hear the little creakings of his inexorable approach along the veranda.
      This, I think, is it. There’s nothing more I can do. So, slipping in between the sliding door
and a wickerwork trunk, I get myself into a position suitable at least for this stage of the
proceedings: a hidey-hole from which, in the safety of concealment, I can spy upon a criminal at
work.
      The footsteps advance along the veranda until they are immediately outside the paper-door
of my master’s bedroom. There they stop dead.
      I dare not even breathe. My every nerve is at full stretch as I hunch down waiting for the
thief’s next move. I realized later that my feelings at that time were precisely those which I
could expect to feel if I ever hunted rats. It was as though my very soul were about to pounce
from my eyes.
      I am indebted to this thief that, though long ago I resolved never to turn ratter, nevertheless
I have been enlightened, this once in my lifetime, as to the nature of the hunting thrill.
      The next moment a tiny area in the very middle of the third frame of the paper-door began
to change color, to darken as though it had been struck by a raindrop. As I stare at that
dampened spot, I can see behind its darkening an object of pale scarlet. Suddenly the paper
gives and through it pokes the bare length of a wet red tongue. The tongue seems just to pulse
there for a second, and then it vanishes into the darkness. In its place a shining thing,
something menacingly glittery, appears in the tongue-licked hole. The eye of a thief. Strangely
enough, that gleaming eye seems to disregard all other objects in the room and to be
concentrating its gaze directly upon the place where I lurk behind the wickerwork trunk. Though
that terrifying inspection cannot have lasted for even so much as a minute, I have never
endured a stare so baleful or intense.
      So to be stared at burns away whole stretches of one’s life-expectancy.
      The scorching of that eye became intolerable, and I had just made up my mind to jump out
from behind the trunk when the paper-door slid gently sideways and the thief was at last
disclosed to my fascinated sight.
      Though at this point it would be normal, in accordance with the established customs of the
storyteller’s art, to offer a description of this rare and unexpected visitor, I must beg the
reader’s indulgence for a small digression of which the point and pertinence will, in due course,
become clear. My digression takes the form of a statement of my humble views upon the
nature of omnipotence and omniscience, both human and divine; views upon which I would invite
the discerning comment of all my honored readers.
     From time immemorial God has been worshiped as omniscient and omnipotent. In
particular, the Christian God, at least up until the twentieth century, was honored for his alleged
possession of those qualities.
     However, that alleged omniscience and omnipotence could well be regarded by the
ordinary man in the street as, in fact, their precise opposites: nescience and impotence. I
believe that, not since the world was first created, has anyone preceded me in identifying this
extraordinary paradox. It is consequently unavoidable that I should feel a certain pride of self-
discovery, pride in this revelation that I am indeed no ordinary cat. It is accordingly to drive
home to numbskull human beings the unwisdom of sneering at cats that I offer the following
analysis of the paradox which, if I had a name, would be named after its inimitable discoverer. I
am informed that God created all things in this universe, from which it must follow that God
created men. In fact, I am advised that this proposition is specifically stated as a fundamental
truth in some fat book which human beings call the Bible. Now, mankind has been engaged for
several thousands of years in the accumulation of human observations about the facts of
humanity. From which mass of data one particular fact has emerged which not only causes
human beings to wonder at and admire themselves, but also inclines them to acquire ever-
deepening credence in the omniscience and omnipotence of God. The particular fact in question
is the fact that, although mankind now teems upon this earth, no two human creatures have
identical faces. The constituents of the human face are, of course, fixed: two eyes, two ears, a
nose and a mouth. Further, the general dimensions of those constituent items are, more or less,
the same. Nevertheless, though the myriads of human faces are thus all constructed from the
same basic materials, all the final products differ from each other. The human reaction to this
state of affairs is not only to rejoice in how bloody marvelous it is that each and every one of
them commands an individuality of appearance, but also to admire the miraculous skill of the
Creator who, using such simple and uniform materials, has yet produced such an infinite variety
of result. For surely only a power of infinite originality of imagination could have created such
almost incredible diversity. Even the greatest of painters cannot produce, however strenuously
he exerts himself in pursuit of variety, more than twelve or thirteen individual masterpieces. So it
is natural that mankind should marvel at God’s astonishing and sin-glehanded achievement in
the production of people. Since such a pro-tean creativity cannot be matched by men as
themselves creators, inevitably they regard the process as a manifestation of divinity and, in
particular, of divine omnipotence. For which reasons human beings stand in endless awe of
God, and, of course, considered from the human viewpoint, it is entirely understandable that
they should.
     However, considered from the feline viewpoint, the same facts lead to the opposite
conclusion: that God, if not entirely impotent, is at least of limited ability, even incompetent.
Certainly of no greater creative capability than muddle-headed man. God is supposed to have
created, of intent, as many faces as there are people. But surely one cannot just dismiss the
possibility that, in fact, he lacked sureness of touch; that, though he originally intended to create
every man-jack of mankind with the same face, he found the task impossible, and that he
consequently produced so long a string of botched appearances as to end up with the present
disorderly state of the human physiognomy. Thus the variformity of the human face can equally
well be regarded either as a demonstration of God’s success or as evidence of his failure.
Lacking knowledge of his original creative intent, one can only say that the evidence of the
human face argues no more strongly for God’s omnipotence than it does for his incompetence.
      Consider human eyes. They are embedded in pairs within a flat surface and their owners,
therefore, cannot simultaneously see to both their left and right. It is regrettable, but only one
side of any object can, at any one time, enter their field of vision. Being thus incapable of
seeing in the round, even the daily happenings of life in his own society, it is perhaps not
surprising that man should get so excited about certain one-sided aspects of his limited view of
reality, and, in particular, should allow himself to fall into awe of God. Any creature capable of
seeing things whole must recognize that, if it is difficult to create infinite variation, it is equally
difficult to create absolute similitude. Had Raphael ever been asked to paint two absolutely
identical portraits of the Madonna, he would have found it no less irksome than to be pressed
for two pictures of that subject in which every single detail was totally different. Indeed, it is
probable that the painting of identical portraits would prove the harder task. Kōbō Daishi was
not only the Great Teacher but also a master calligrapher. But had he been asked one morning
to inscribe the two characters of his own name in exactly the same style as he had done the
day before, he would have found it more difficult than to write them differently. Consider, too,
the nature of language-learning. Human beings learn their various tongues purely by imitation.
They reproduce, without any display of initiative or inventiveness, the noises made by the daily
mouthings of their mothers, nurses, and whomsoever else they may happen to hear. To the
best of their ability, they imitate. Nevertheless, in the course of one or two decades, the
languages thus produced by imitation show distinct changes in pronunciation. Which amply
demonstrates the human inability to make perfect imitations. Exact imitation is extremely difficult
to achieve.
      Now if God had shown himself able to create human beings indistinguishable from each
other, that would have been impressive. If every single one of them appeared with the selfsame
features, like so many mold-cast masks of a fat-faced woman, then indeed would God’s
omnipotence have been tellingly demonstrated. But the actual state of affairs, a situation in
which God has let loose under the sun all manner of different faces, could well be taken to
prove the limited competence of his creative power.
      I must confess that I have now forgotten why I embarked upon this digression. However,
since similar forgetfulness is common among mankind, I trust such a lapse will be found
pardonable in a cat. The fact is that the foregoing thoughts leapt naturally to my mind the
moment that the paper-door slid open and I at last clapped eyes upon the thief.
      Why so? you may ask. Why should the sudden appearance of a thief upon the threshold
prompt this closely reasoned, this irrefutable critique of divine omnipotence? As I said, I have
forgotten why. But if I may have a moment to recollect my train of thought, I’m sure I can find
the reason.
      Ah yes, I have it.
      When I looked at the thief’s calm face, I was so struck by one peculiarity that my long-held
theories about God’s incompetence as a face-creator seemed in that instant to he crumbling
down to nothing. For the peculiarity was that the thief’s face was the spitting image of the
handsome face of our much-loved Avalon Coldmoon. Naturally, I lack acquaintances among the
burglaring fraternity, but, basing my judgment on their outrageous behaviors, I had formed my
own private picture of a burglar’s face. But the face of this particular burglar did not match my
image. I had always assumed that a burglar’s nostrils would be widely splayed to left and right,
that his eyes would be as big and round as copper coins, and that his hair would be close-
cropped. But there’s a vast difference between the fancied and the fact, so vast one should
always be wary of giving free rein to one’s imagination. This thief is tall and slimly built, with a
charmingly darkish complexion and straight, level eyebrows: altogether a very modish sort of
burglar. He seems, again like Coldmoon, to be about twenty-six or twenty-seven. Indeed a God
so deft as to be able to produce this startling likeness cannot possibly be regarded as
incompetent. To tell the truth, the resemblance is so close that my immediate and astonished
reaction was to wonder whether, bursting in like this in the middle of the night, Coldmoon had
gone mad.
      It was only when I noticed the absence of any sign of a budding moustache that I realized
that the intruder could not possibly be Coldmoon.
      Coldmoon is both masculine and handsome. He has been manufactured by God with such
especial care that it is proper he should so easily besot that walking credit card, Miss Opula
Goldfield. Yet, to judge from his appearance, this thief’s power to attract women can be no less
strong than Coldmoon’s. If that Goldfield girl is besotted by Coldmoon’s eyes and mouth, it
would be no more than a matter of courtesy that she should go into similarly ardent raptures
over those of this burglar. Quite apart from the question of courtesy, it would be contrary to
logic if she failed to love him. Being so naturally quick-minded and intelligent, she would, of
course, immediately grasp the point, and it would follow that, if she were offered the burglar as
a substitute for Coldmoon, she would, body and soul, adore him and live with him in conjugal
felicity till death did them part. Even if Coldmoon so succumbs to the wiles of Waverhouse that
this very rare and excellent match is broken off, still, so long as the burglar remains alive and
well, there is no real cause for concern. Having thus projected the possible train of future
events, I felt, purely for Miss Goldfield’s sake, relieved and reassured. That this noble burglar
exists as a husband-in-reserve is, I think, likely to be important to her happiness in life.
      The thief is carrying something under his arm. Peering, I discover that it’s that decrepit
blanket which, a little earlier on, my master had pitched away into his study. The thief is
dressed in a short coat of cotton drawn tight below his bottom with a sash of blue-gray silk. His
pallid legs are bare from the knees down. Gently he extends one foot from the veranda and
sets it softly on the bedroom matting. At which moment my dozing master, no doubt still
dreaming that his finger is being savaged by a scarlet book, turns over in his sleep and, as he
slumps with a heavy thud into a new position, suddenly shouts, “It’s Coldmoon!” The burglar
drops the blanket and whips back as though he’d trodden on a scorpion.
      Through the flimsy paper of the sliding door, I see the silhouette of two long legs a-tremble.
My master grunts in his sleep, mumbles something meaningless and knocks his red book
sideways. He then begins a noisy scratching of his dark-skinned arm as though he’d caught the
scurvy. He suddenly goes quiet, and lies there fast asleep with his head off the pillow. His shout
of Coldmoon-recognition relates, not to reality, but to some incident of dream. Nevertheless, for
quite a little while the burglar stood silent on the veranda watching the room for any further
liveliness. Satisfied at last that my master and his wife are safely deep in sleep, he reintrudes
one cautious foot. There is, this time, no commentary on Coldmoon. Almost at once the second
foot appears.
     The glow of the night lamp, which hitherto had bathed the whole of this six-mat bedroom, is
now sharply segmented by the shadow of the thief. An utter darkness has fallen upon the
wickerwork trunk and reaches halfway up the wall behind it. I turn my head and see the shadow
of the intruder’s skull drifting about the wall some two-thirds of the way up to the ceiling.
Though the man is certainly handsome, the misshapen shadow of his head, like some deformed
potato, is positively ludicrous. For a while he stood there staring down at Mrs. Sneaze’s face
and then, suddenly and for goodness knows what reason, broke into a grin. I was surprised to
find that even in such aimless grinning he was a twin to Coldmoon. Lying close to Mrs. Sneaze’s
pillow there is an oblong box, perhaps fifteen inches long and some four inches broad. The lid is
nailed down fast and the box itself so placed as to suggest that its contents must be precious.
It is in fact that box of yams which, just the other day, Mr. Tatara Sampei presented to the
Sneazes on his return from holiday at his family’s country place in Karatsu. It is, one must
admit, rather unusual to go to sleep with yams to decorate one’s bedside, but Mrs. Sneaze is a
lady little troubled by notions of propriety of placement. She keeps high-quality cooking sugar in
her chest of drawers, so the presence in her bedroom of pickles, let alone of yams, would
hardly even ruffle her placid unconcern. But the burglar, a non-participant in the alleged
omniscience of God, could hardly be expected to have such knowledge of her nature and it is
consequently understandable that he should jump to the conclusion that a box so carefully kept
within hand’s reach of a sleeping woman is certain to be worth removing. He lifts and hefts the
box. Finding its weight matches his expectations, he nods in satisfaction. It suddenly struck me
as extremely funny that this gentleman-thief this very prepossessing burglar, was about to
waste his expert skills in vegetable furacity. However, since it could be dangerous to make my
presence heard, I hold back the laughter bursting to escape.
     The burglar wraps the yam box carefully in the blanket and looks round the room for
something with which to tie the bundle. His eye lights upon the sash that my master threw down
on the floor when he was undressing for bed. The burglar ties and knots the sash around the
yam box and hoists it smoothly onto his back. I doubt if women would be attracted to the figure
he now presents. He proceeds to stuff two of the children’s sleeveless jackets into my master’s
knitted underpants.
     Each of the leg parts looks like a snake that has swallowed a frog. Perhaps their swollen
ugliness could be better compared to the shape of some pregnant serpent. At all events the
shape produced was odd and rather ugly. If you don’t believe me, try it for yourself. The thief
then tied the pant legs round his neck, leaving his hands free for further rummage.
     Wondering what he’ll nobble next, I watch him closely. He spreads out my master’s silk
kimono on the floor and neatly, quickly, piles upon it Mrs. Sneaze’s obi, my master’s haori, and
his remaining underwear together with various bits and bobs which he finds about the room. I
am deeply impressed by the sheer professionalism of his larceny, the technical polish of his
packaging and parcel work. First he fashions a long silk cord by knotting Mrs. Sneaze’s obi-
string to her waistband-fastener.
     With this cord he ties his loot into a tidy package, and lifts the lot with one hand. Taking a
last look round, he spots a packet of cheap gaspers lying beside my master’s head. He shoves
the packet into his sleeve but, on second thought, takes it out again and, carefully selecting a
cigarette, bends to light it at the flame of the night lamp. He inhales deeply, like a man content
with a job well done. Before the exhaled smoke had thinned to nothingness around the milky
glass of the night lamp’s chimney, the sound of the burglar’s footfalls had faded away into silent
distance. Husband and wife remain deep-sunk in slumber. Contrary even to their own idea of
themselves, human beings are a careless and unwary lot. I myself feel quite worn out by the
night’s excitements and, if I now continue this account of them, I shall have some kind of break-
down. . .
     I slept both deep and late, so that, when I finally awoke, the sun was already bright in the
blue spring sky. My master and his wife were talking to a policeman at the kitchen entrance.
     “I see. You reckon he entered here and then worked round toward the bedroom? And you
two were asleep and noticed nothing at all?”
     “That’s right.” My master seems a bit embarrassed.
     “And about what time did this burglary take place?” The policeman asks the usual silly
question. If one could he in a position to state the hour of such an offense, the chances are that
no offense would have occurred.
     My master and his wife seem not to realize this point and take the question in real earnest.
     “I wonder whenabouts it was.”
     “Well now, let me think,” says Mrs. Sneaze. She seems to imagine that by taking thought
one can fix the time of events that took place when one was unconscious. “What was the time,”
she asks her husband, “when you went to bed?”
     “It was after you that I went to bed.”
     “Yes,” she agrees, “I went to bed before you did.”
     “I wonder what time I woke up.”
     “I think it was at half past seven.”
     “So what time would that make it when the thief broke in?”
     “It must, I suppose, have been sometime in the dead of night.”
     “Of course it was sometime in the dead of night. But what I’m asking you about is the
particular time.”
     “Well, that I can’t just say for certain. Not until I’ve had a good think.” She’s still committed
to her thinking ways.
     The policeman had only asked his potty question as a matter of form, and he is in fact
totally indifferent as to the precise time at which the burglar broke in. All he wants is that my
master and his wife should give some kind of an answer: any answer, never mind whether true
or not, would do. But the victims engage in such pointless and protracted dialogue that the
policeman shows signs of irritation. Eventually he snaps at them.
     “Right then. So the time of the burglary is not known. Is that correct?”
     “I suppose it does come down to that,” my master answers in his usual drily pedagogic
manner.
     The policeman was not amused. He plodded stolidly on in accordance with his own routine
of police procedure.
     “In that case you should send in a written statement of complaint to the effect that on such
and such a date in this the thirty-eighth year of the Meiji Era, you, having fastened the
entrances to your dwelling, retired to bed, and that subsequently a burglar, having removed
such and such a sliding wooden shutter, sneaked into such and such a room or rooms and there
stole such and such items of property. Remember, this paper is not just a statement of lost
goods but constitutes a formal complaint which may later be used as an accusation. You’d be
advised not to address it to anyone in particular.”
     “Do we have to identify every single item that’s been stolen?”
     “Yes. Set it all out in a detailed list. Coats, for instance, set down how many have gone,
and the value of each one taken. No,” he went on in answer to my master’s next suggestion, “I
don’t think it would help much if I stepped inside. The burglary has already taken place.” With
which unhelpful comment he took himself off.
     My master, having planted himself with his writing brush and ink-stone in the very center of
the room, calls his wife to come and sit beside him. Then, almost in belligerence, he announces,
“I shall now compose a written statement of complaint. Tell me what’s been stolen. Item by
item. Sharp, if you please.”
     “What cheek! Who d’you think you are to tell me to look sharp? If you talk to me in that
dictatorial manner, I shall tell you nothing.” Her toilet incomplete, she plonks herself down sulkily
beside him.
     “Just look at yourself! You might be some cheap tart at a post-town inn. Why aren’t you
wearing an obi?”
     “If you don’t like how I look, buy me decent clothes. A post-town tart, indeed! How can I
dress correctly when half my stuff’s been stolen?”
     “He took your obi? What a despicable thing to do! All right then, we’ll start with that. What
kind of obi was it?”
     “What d’you mean? What kind? How many obi do you think I’ve got?
     It was my black satin with the crêpe lining.”
     “One obi of black satin lined with crêpe. . . And what would you say it cost?”
     “About six yen, I think.”
     “Six yen! That’s far too expensive. You know we can’t afford to fling our money about on
fripperies. Don’t spend more than one yen fifty sen on the replacement.”
     “And where do you think you’d find a decent obi at that price? As I always say, you’re
totally heartless. You couldn’t care less how wretchedly your wife may be dressed, so long as
you yourself look reasonably turned out.”
     “All right. We’ll drop the matter. Now, what’s next?”
     “A surcoat woven with thrown silk. It was given to me as a keepsake of Aunt Kōno. You
won’t find surcoats these days of that quality.”
     “I didn’t ask for a lecture on the decline of textiles. What would it cost?”
     “Not less than fifteen yen.”
     “You mean you’ve been going around in a surcoat worth not less than fifteen yen? That’s
real extravagance. A standard of living miles beyond our means.”
     “Oh, what does it matter? You didn’t even buy it.”
     “What’s the next item?”
     “One pair of black foot-gloves.”
     “Yours?”
     “Don’t be silly. Whoever heard of a woman wearing black ones?
     They’re yours, of course. And the price, twenty-seven sen.”
     “Next?”
     “One box of yams.”
     “Did he even filch the yams? I wonder how he’ll eat them. Stewed, d’you think? Or in some
kind of soup?”
     “How the devil should I know? You’d better run along and ask him.”
     “What were they worth?”
     “I wouldn’t know the price of yams.”
     “In that case, let’s say twelve yen fifty sen.”
     “That’s ridiculous. How could a box of yams, even ones grown down in Kyushu and then
transported here, cost as much as that?”
     “You said you didn’t know what they would cost.”
     “I did, and I don’t. But twelve yen fifty sen would be plain absurd.
     Far, far too much.”
     “How can you say in one and the same breath that you don’t know their price but that
twelve yen fifty sen is absurd? It makes no sense at all. Except to prove that you’re an
Otanchin Palaeologus.”
     “That I’m a what?”
     “That you’re an Otanchin Palaeologus.”
     “What’s that?”
     One can hardly blame the lady. Though long experience has given me a certain facility in
decoding my master’s thoughts as expressed in vile puns and twisted references to Japanese
provincial slang and the mustier tracts of Western scholarship, this particular demonstration of
his skills is both sillier and more obscure than usual. I’m still not sure that I understand his full
intention, but I suspect he meant no more than that he thought his wife a blockhead. Why then
didn’t he just leave it at “Otanchin?” Because, despite his temerarious attack on her balding
pate, he lacks the guts to risk a head-on clash, and he’s not entirely certain that she’s never
heard that slang-term for a fool. So what does he do? He sees a similarity of sound between
“Otanchin” and “Konstantin,” the name of the last Palaeologue Emperor of Byzantium. Not that
the sounds are sufficiently similar to justify a pun. Not that Constantine the Eleventh has any
remote connection with the price of yams. Not that such truths would sway my master. He
simply wants to call his wife a blockhead without having to cope with the consequences of
doing so. No wonder Mrs. Sneaze is foxed and no wonder she presses for an explanation.
     “Never mind about that. What’s next on the list? You haven’t yet mentioned my own
kimono.”
     “Never mind about what’s next. Just tell me what ‘Otanchin Palaeologus’ means.”
     “It hasn’t got any meaning.”
     “You’re so excessively clever that I’m sure you could explain what it means if you wanted
to. What kind of a fool do you take me for? I bet you’ve just been calling me names by taking
advantage of the fact that I can’t speak English.”
     “Stop talking nonsense and get on with the rest of the list. If we aren’t quick in lodging this
complaint, we’ll never get our property returned.”
     “It’s already too late to make an effective complaint. I’d rather you told me something more
about Otanchin Palaeologus.”
     “You really are making a nuisance of yourself. As I said before, it has no meaning
whatsoever. There’s nothing more to be said.”
     “Well, if that’s how you feel, I’ve nothing more to say about the list.”
     “What pigheadedness! Have it your own way. I won’t then write out this complaint for you.”
     “Suit yourself. But don’t come bothering me for details of what’s missing. It’s you, not me,
who’s lodging the complaint. I just don’t care two hoots whether you write it or you don’t.”
     “Then let’s forget it,” snaps my master. In his usual abrupt manner he gets up and stalks off
into his study. Mrs. Sneaze retires to the living room and dumps herself down in front of her
sewing-box. For some ten minutes, this precious pair sit glaring in silence at the paper-door
between them.
     That was the situation when Mr. Tatara Sampei, donor of yams, came bustling gaily in
through the front door. This Tatara was once the Sneazes’ houseboy, but nowadays, having
received his degree in law, he works in the mining department of some big company or other.
Like, but junior to, the slippery Suzuki, he’s another budding businessman.
     Nevertheless, because of his former connection with the family, he still occasionally visits
the humble dwelling of his erstwhile benefactor. Indeed, having once been almost one of that
family, he sometimes spends whole Sundays in the house.
     “What wonderful weather, Mrs. Sneaze.” He sits on the floor in front of her, with his
trousered knees drawn up, and speaks as ever in his own Karatsu dialect.
     “Why, hello, Mr. Tatara.”
     “Is the master out?”
     “No, he’s in the study.”
     “It’s bad for the health to study as hard as he does. Today’s a Sunday, and Sundays don’t
come every day of the week. Now do they?”
     “There’s no point in telling me. Go and say it to my husband.”
     “Yes, but. . .” He looks around the room and then half-asks his hostess, “The girls, now,
they’re not in?” But the words are hardly out of his mouth when Tonko and Sunko both run in
from the next room.
     “Mr. Tatara, have you brought the goodies?” Tonko, the elder daughter, wastes no time in
reminding him of a recent promise.
     Tatara scratches his head. “What a memory you’ve got! I’m sorry I forgot them, but really,
next time, I promise to remember.”
     “What a shame,” says Tonko, and her younger sister immediately echoes “What a shame.”
Mrs. Sneaze, in a modest revival of her natural good humor, smiles slightly.
     “I confess I forgot the raw fish goodies, but I did bring around some yams. Have you two
girls yet tried them?”
     “What’s a yam?” asks Tonko, and little Miss Echo pipes up with,
     “What’s a yam?”
     “Ah, so you’ve not yet eaten them. Ask your mother to cook you some at once. Karatsu
yams are especially delicious, quite different from those you get in Tokyo.” As Tatara tootles
away on his provincial trumpet, Mrs. Sneaze remembers to thank him again for his kindness.
     “It really was kind of you, Mr. Tatara, to bring us yams the other day.
     And so many of them. Such a generous thought.”
     “Well, have you eaten them? I had the box I made specially so that they wouldn’t get
broken. I hope you found them undamaged and in their full length.”
     “I’m sure we would have. But I’m sorry to say that, only last night, the whole lot were stolen
by a burglar.”
     “You’ve been burgled for yams? What a peculiar criminal. I’d never have dreamt that the
passion for yams, even Karatsu yams, could be carried so far.”Tatara is enormously
impressed.
     “Mother,” says Tonko, “Was there a burglar here last night?”
     “Yes,” Mrs. Sneaze answers lightly.
     “A burglar? Here? A real, real burglar?” Sunko voices wonderment, but immediately goes
on to ask, “What sort of face did he have?”
     Mrs. Sneaze, stumped by this curious question, finds something suitable to say, “He had,”
she says, looking over at Tatara for sympathetic understanding, “a most fearsome face.”
     “Do you mean,” asks the tactless Tonko, “that he looked like Mr. Tatara?”
     “Really,Tonko, that’s very rude of you.”
     “Dear, oh dear,” laughs the visitor, “is my face as fearsome as all that?”
     He once more scratches his head. There’s a bald patch, about an inch across, on the back
of his head. It began to appear not much more than a month ago and, though he’s taken it
round to the quack, it shows no sign of improvement. It is, of course,Tonko who draws attention
to the patch.
     “Why look,” she says, “Mr. Tatara’s head is shiny just like mother’s.”
     “Tonko, behave yourself. I told you to be quiet.”
     “Was the thief’s head shiny, too?” Sunko innocently asks. In spite of themselves, the adults
burst out laughing. Still, the children’s chatter so interrupts all conversation that Mrs. Sneaze
decides to pack them off.
     “Run along now and play in the garden. Be good girls and later on I’ll find you both some
sweeties.”
     After the girls had gone, Mrs. Sneaze turned to Tatara and with all the gravity of a fellow-
sufferer enquired, “Mr. Tatara, what has happened to your head?”
     “Some kind of skin-infection. Not exactly moth, but a bug of some sort which takes ages to
clear up. Are you having the same trouble?”
     “Ugh! don’t talk about bugs. In my case the trouble’s the usual female problem of the hair
thinning because it’s drawn so tight in the married woman’s hairstyle.”
     “All baldness is caused by bacteria.”
     “Well, mine’s not.”
     “Come, come, Mrs. Sneaze, you’re being obstinate. One cannot fly in the face of the
Scientific facts.”
     “Say what you like, it’s not bacteria. But tell me, what’s the English word for baldness?”
     Tatara said he wasn’t sure, but he answered her correctly.
     “No, no,” she said, “Not that, it’s a very much longer word.”
     “Why not ask your husband? He could tell you straight off.”
     “I’m asking you precisely because he refuses to help.”
     “Well, all I know is ‘baldness.’ You say the word you want’s much longer. Can you give me
an idea of its sound?”
     “‘Otanchin Palaeologus.’ I have an idea that ‘Otanchin’ means bald and ‘Palaeologus’ head.”
     “Possibly. I’ll pop into the master’s study a little later and look it up for you in Webster’s
Dictionary. By the way, the master is eccentric, isn’t he? Fancy staying indoors and doing
nothing on such a lovely day! No wonder his stomach-troubles never get better. Why don’t you
persuade him to go and view the flowers at Ueno?”
     “Please, you ask him. He never listens to what a woman says.”
     “Is he still licking jam?”
     “Yes, as always.”
     “The other day he was complaining that you’re always telling him he overdoes it. ‘But she’s
wrong,’ he said, ‘I really don’t eat all that much.’
     So I told him the obvious answer was that you and the girls are also fond of jam. . .”
     “Mr. Tatara, how could you say such a thing!”
     “But, Mrs. Sneaze, you’ve got a jam-licker’s face.”
     “How can you tell a thing like that by looking at someone’s face?”
     “I can’t, of course. But, honestly, Mrs. Sneaze, don’t you ever take any?”
     “Well, naturally I sometimes take a little. And why shouldn’t I? After all, it’s ours.”
     Tatara laughed right out. “I thought that was the answer. But seriously,” he said, adopting a
more sober tone, “that really was bad luck about the burglar. Was it only yams that he filched?”
     “If it were only yams, we wouldn’t be so upset. But he’s taken all of our everyday clothing.”
     “Then you really are in trouble. Will you have to borrow money again? If only this thing here
were a dog, not just an idle cat. . . What a difference that might have made. Honestly, you
ought to keep a dog, a big sturdy dog. Cats are practically useless. All they do is eat. This cat,
for instance, has it ever even caught a rat?”
     “Not a single one. It’s a very lazy and impudent cat.”
     “Ah! that’s terrible. You must get rid of it at once. Shall I take it along with me? Boiled, you
know, they’re really quite good eating.”
     “Don’t tell me you eat cats!”
     “Yes, indeed, every now and again. They taste delicious,”
     “You must have a remarkably strong stomach.”
     I have heard that among these degraded houseboys there are some so close to outright
barbarism that they do, in fact, eat cats: but not until now had I ever dreamt that our Tatara, a
person with whom I’d long been on terms of quite some coziness, could be so base a creature.
Of course he’s not our houseboy any longer. Far from it. Though barely out of university, he is
now not only a distinguished Bachelor of Law but also a rising executive in that well-known
limited company, Mutsui Products. I was, therefore, more than surprised. The proverb says,
“When you see a man, take him for a felon;” the truth of that adage has been well-
demonstrated by the thieving conduct of last night’s pseudo-Coldmoon. Thanks now to Tatara, I
have just invented another proverb: “When you see a man, take him for a felophage.” The
longer one lives in this wicked world, the more one learns. It is always good to learn, but as
one accumulates knowledge of the world’s wickedness, one grows ever the more cautious,
ever the more prepared for the worst. Artfulness, uncharitableness, self-defensive wariness:
these are the fruits of worldly learning. The penalty of age is this rather ugly knowingness.
Which would seem to explain why one never finds among the old a single decent person. They
know too much to see things straight, to feel things cleanly, to act without compromise.
     Thinking that there might then be some merit in departing this world while still in my prime, I
was making myself small in a corner lest such a departure should be forced upon me in the
company of onions stewing in Tatara’s pot, when my master, drawn from his study by the sound
of Tatara’s voice, slouched back into the living room.
     “I hear, sir, you’ve been burgled. What a stupid thing to have happen.”
     Tatara opens the conversation somewhat bluntly.
     “That yam-purloiner was certainly stupid.” My master has no doubt whatsoever of his own
profound intelligence.
     “Indeed, the thief was stupid, but his victim wasn’t exactly clever.”
     “Perhaps those with nothing worth stealing, people like Mr. Tatara, are the cleverest of all.”
Rather surprisingly Mrs. Sneaze comes out on her husband’s side.
     “Anyway, one thing’s clear. That this cat’s totally useless. Really, one can’t imagine what it
thinks it’s for. It catches no rats. It sits calmly by while a burglar breaks in. It serves no purpose
whatsoever. How about letting me take it?”
      “Well,” says My master, “maybe I will. What would you do with it?”
      “Cook it and eat it.”
      On hearing that ferocious proposition, my master gave vent to a minister wail of dyspeptic
laughter, but he answered neither yes nor no.
      This, to my mingled surprise and glad relief, seemed to satisfy Tatara for he pressed no
further with his disgusting proposal. After a brief pause, my master, changing the subject,
remarks, “The cat doesn’t matter, but I do object most strongly to anyone stealing my clothes. I
feel so cold.”
      He looks indeed dispirited, and no wonder he feels cold. Until yesterday he was wearing
two quilted kimonos: but today, wearing only a single lined-kimono and a short-sleeved shirt,
he’s been sitting about since morning and has taken no exercise. What little blood he has is
totally engaged in keeping his miserable stomach going, so naturally it doesn’t get round to his
arms and legs.
      “It’s hopeless being a teacher. Your world gets turned upside-down by a mere burglar. It’s
still not too late to make a change. Why not come into the business world?”
      “Since my scholarly spouse just doesn’t care for businessmen, it’s a waste of time even to
suggest the idea.” Mrs. Sneaze, of course, would be delighted to see him go into business.
      “How many years is it,”Tatara asks, “since you took your degree?”
      “Eight years, I think,” answers Mrs. Sneaze looking toward her husband. My master neither
confirms nor denies the period.
      “Eight years and your pay’s the same as on the day you started.
      However hard you study, no one appreciates your merits.‘All by himself the master is, and
lonely.’” For Mrs. Sneaze’s benefit Tatara quotes a scrap of Chinese poetry remembered from
his days in middle school.
      Since she fails to understand him she makes no answer.
      “Of course I don’t like teaching, but I dislike commerce even more.” My master seems to
be a bit uncertain in his own mind what it is he does like.
      “He dislikes everything,” says Mrs. Sneaze.
      “Well, anyway I’m sure he doesn’t dislike his wife.” Tatara makes an unexpected sally.
      “I dislike her most of all.” My master’s comment is extremely terse.
      Mrs. Sneaze turns slightly away and her face stiffens, but she then looks back at her
husband and says, as if she thought she were getting a good dig in at him, “I suppose you’ll be
saying next that you dislike living.”
      “True,” came his off-hand answer, taking the wind clean out of her sails, “I don’t like living
much.” He’s way past praying for.
      “You should go for a brisk walk every now and again. Staying indoors all day must be
ruining your health. And what’s more, you really should become a businessman. Making money
is simple as pie.”
      “Look who’s talking. You yourself aren’t exactly rolling in it.”
      “Ah, well. But I only joined the company last year. Even so, I’ve more saved up than you
have.”
      “How much have you saved?” Inevitably, Mrs. Sneaze rises to such bait, and puts her
question with real earnestness.
     “Fifty yen, already.”
     “And how much is your salary?” Again it’s Mrs. Sneaze who asks the question.
     “Thirty yen a month. The company retains five yen and saves it up for me. In an
emergency, I can draw on the accumulated capital. Really, why don’t you buy some tramway
shares with your pin-money? Their value will double within three or four months. Indeed anyone
with a bit of capital could double, even triple, his money in next to no time.”
     “If I had any pin-money,” Mrs. Sneaze somewhat sourly observes, “I wouldn’t now be up a
gum tree all on account of some petty theft.”
     “That’s why I keep saying your husband should go into business. For instance, if he’d
studied law and then joined a company or a bank, he would by now be earning three or four
hundred yen a month. It seems a shame he didn’t. By the way, sir, do you happen to know a
man called Suzuki Tōjūrō who got his degree in engineering?”
     “Yes, he called here only yesterday.”
     “So you’ve seen him then. I ran into him a few days back at a party and your name cropped
up. I said I’d once been a member of your household, and he replied that he and you had once
shared lodgings at some temple in Koishikawa.‘Next time you see him,’ he said,‘please give him
my kindest regards and say I’ll be looking him up one of these days.’”
     “I gather he’s recently been transferred back to Tokyo.”
     “That’s right. Until the other day he was pining away somewhere down in Kyushu, but he’s
just been moved up to the head office here in Tokyo. He’s a smooth lad, that one.
     Smooth as a keg of lacquer. He even takes the trouble to speak engagingly to me. . . Have
you any idea how much he earns?”
     “Not the foggiest.”
     “Well, on top of his basic monthly pay of 250 yen, he’ll be getting bonuses twice a year, in
July and December, so that his overall income can’t be less than four or five hundred yen each
month. To think that a man like that can be coining the stuff while you, a teacher of the English
Reader, can scarcely make ends meet. It’s a lunatic state of affairs.”
     “Lunatic’s the word.” Even a man as snooty and superior as my master is no different from
the herd of his fellow men when it comes to matters of money. Indeed, the very fact that he’s
skint the whole year long makes him rather more keen than most to get his claws on a copper.
However, having spoken at such length on the marvels of making money, Tatara has now
exhausted his stock of slogans about the beatitudes of the business life: so he turns to Mrs.
Sneaze on a totally different tack.
     “Does a man called Coldmoon come visiting your husband?”
     “Yes, often.”
     “What sort of fellow is he?”
     “I’m told he’s a brilliant scholar.”
     “Handsome, would you say?”
     Mrs. Sneaze permits herself an unbecoming titter. “I’d say that in looks he’s just about as
good looking as you,”
     “Is that so? About as good-looking as me. . . ”
     “How do you come to be interested in Coldmoon?” enquires my master.
     “The other day someone asked me to ask around about him. Is he a man worth making
enquiries about?” Even before he gets an answer, Tatara shows by his condescending tone that
he doesn’t think much of Coldmoon.
     “As a man,” says my master,“he’s a great deal more impressive than you.”
     “Is he, now? More impressive than me?” Characteristically,Tatara neither smiles nor seems
offended. A sensitive man of the utmost self-control? A dense unfeeling dullard? Need one ask?
He eats cats, doesn’t he?
     “But tell me, will this Coldmoon fellow be getting a doctorate one of these days?”
     “I’m told he’s writing a thesis now.”
     “So he’s a fool after all. . . Writing a thesis for a doctorate indeed! I’d expected him to be
brighter than that.”
     “You don’t half fancy yourself,” says Mrs. Sneaze with a laugh. “You always did reckon
yourself the bee’s knees and the cat’s whiskers. But what’s so foolish about being well
educated?”
     “Someone told me that once this Coldmoon gets his doctorate, then he’ll be given
someone’s daughter. Something like that. So of course I said, ‘A man’s a fool who works for a
doctorate just to marry a girl.
     Someone should not marry someone’s daughter to anyone so foolish.
     Better for,’ I said, ‘someone’s daughter to marry me.’”
     My master wobbled his head. “To whom did you say all that?”
     “To the Man who asked me to ask around about Coldmoon.”
     “Suzuki?”
     “Golly, no. I wouldn’t be bandying words with a big shot like that on such a delicate matter.
At least, not yet I wouldn’t.”
     “A lion at home, a wood louse in the open!” says Mrs. Sneaze. “You talk big, Mr. Tatara,
when you’re here with us, but I bet you curl up small and quiet when you talk to Mr. Suzuki.”
     “Of course I do. It would be foolhardy to do anything else. One wrong word and I could be
out on my ear.”
     “Tatara,” my master suddenly breaks in, “let’s go out for a walk.”
     Sitting there in the scanty remnants of his wardrobe he’s grown to feel downright frozen,
and the thought has just filtered through that the exercise of walking might warm him up a bit.
There can be no other explanation for such an unprecedented suggestion.
     Tatara, that unpetrine person, that seaweed in the tide-flows of the world, that reed which
bends to its lightest wind, doesn’t even hesitate.
     “Yes, indeed, let’s go. How about Ueno? Let’s go try some of Imozaka’s famous dumplings.
Have you ever tried those dumplings? You, too, Mrs.
     Sneaze, sometime you really ought, if only just once, to try them.
     They’re beautifully soft and even more beautifully cheap. They serve saké as well.” Tatara
was still babbling away about dumplings when my master, his hat on his head, was ready on
the doorstone waiting to leave. . .
     Myself, I need rest. There’s no conceivable reason why I should keep watch upon, still less
record, how my master and Tatara behaved at Ueno Park, how many plates of dumplings they
consumed, and what other pointless happenings transpired. In any case, I lack the energy to
trail along after them. I shall therefore skip all mention of their afternoon doings and, instead,
relax. All created things are entitled to demand of their Creator some rest for recreation. We
are born with an obligation to keep going while we can, and if, like maggots wriggling in the
fabric of this world, we are to keep on thrashing about down here, we do need rest to do it. If
the Creator should take the line that I am born to work and not to sleep, I would agree that I
am indeed born to work but I would also make the unanswerable point that I cannot work
unless I also rest. Even my master, that timid but complaining crank in the grinding mechanism
of our national education, sometimes though it costs him money, takes a weekday off. I am no
human cog. I am a cat, a being sensitive to the most subtle shades of thought and feeling.
Naturally, I tire more quickly than my master. Naturally, I need more sleep. But I confess I’m a
little worried by Tatara’s recent travesty of my case, his wicked misrepresentation of my natural
need for sleep as evidence of my practical uselessness. Philistines such as he, creatures
responsive only to the crudest material phenomena, cannot appreciate anything deeper than the
surface appearances recorded by their five coarse senses. Unless one is rigged out in a
navvy’s clobber and the sweat can be seen and smelt as it pours from one’s brow and armpits,
such persons can’t conceive that one is working. I have heard there was a Zen priest called, I
fancy, Bodhidharma, who remained so long immobilized in spiritual meditation that his legs just
rotted away. That he made no move, even when ivies crept through the wall and their spreading
suckers sealed his eyes and mouth, did not mean that the priest was sleeping or dead. On the
contrary, his mind was very much alive. Legless in the bonds of dusty vegetation, Bodhidharma
came to grasp such brilliantly stylish truths as the notion that, since Zen is of itself so vast and
so illumining, there can be no appreciable distinction between saints and mediocrities. What’s
more, I understand that the followers of Confucius also practice forms of meditation though not
perhaps to the extent of self-immurement and of training their flesh to crippledom by idleness.
      All such meditants have powers burning in the brain that are a lot more fierce than anything
non-meditants could possibly conceive. But because the outward appearance of these spiritual
giants is so solemn, calm, unutterably serene, the fathead nincompoops who come and stare at
them can see nothing more than ordinary persons in states of coma, catatonia, or even simple
syncope. Such mediocrities slander their betters as drones and layabouts. But the fault lies in
the very ordinariness of the eyes of ordinary people, for, in truth, their eyesight is defective in
that their glances merely slither over external appearances, never pierce through to spiritual
inwardness. Now it is understandable that a man like Tatara Sampei, that personification of all
things superficial, would only see shit on a shovel if, undergoing the Zen test of a man’s ability
to find purity among impurities, he were so shown a shitten shovel. But it grieves me to the core
to find that my master who, after all, has read fairly widely and ought to be able to see some
little way beyond the mere surface of things, should nevertheless so readily concur in the flip-
pertigibbet fancies of his shallow houseboy; at least to the extent of failing to raise objections to
his casserole of cat.
      However, when I think things over and see them in perspective, I can understand that it’s
not altogether unreasonable that my master and his houseboy should thus look down on me.
Two relevant sayings by ancient Chinese sages occur to my mind. “Elevated and noble music
cannot penetrate the ears of the worldly wise” and “Everyone sings street-songs but very few
can join in singing such learned airs as ‘Shining Spring’ and ‘White Snow.’” It’s a waste of effort
to try and force those incapable of seeing more than outer forms to understand the inner
brilliance of their own souls. It is like pressing a shaven priest to do his hair in a bun, like asking
a tunny-fish to deliver a lecture, like urging a tram to abandon its rails, like advising my master
to change his job, like telling Tatara to think no more about money. In short, it is exorbitant to
expect men to be other than they are. Now the cat is a social animal and, as such, however
highly he may rate his own true worth, he must contrive to remain, at least to some extent, in
harmony with society as a whole. It is indeed a matter for regret that my master and his wife,
even such creatures as O-san and Tatara, do not treat me with that degree of respect which I
properly deserve, but nothing can be done about it. That’s the way things are, and it would be
very much worse, indeed fatal, if in their ignorance they went so far as to kill me, flay me, serve
up my butchered flesh at Tatara’s dinner table, and sell my emptied skin to a maker of cat-
banjos.
     Since I am a truly unusual cat, one born into this world with a mission demanding purely
mental activity, I am responsible for safeguarding the inestimable worth of my own rarity. As the
proverb says, “The rich man’s son is never seated at the edge of the raised hall.” I, too, am far
too precious to be exposed to the danger of a tumble into calamity. If sheer vainglory led me to
run such risks, I would not only be inviting personal disaster but flouting the evident will of
Heaven. However, even the fiercest tiger, once installed in a zoo, settles down resignedly next
to some filthy pig. Even the largest of wild geese, once in the poulterer’s hands, must finish up
on the selfsame chopping board as the scrawniest chickling. Consequently, for as long as I
consort with ordinary men, I must conduct myself as if I were an ordinary cat. Ordinary cats
catch rats. This long but faultless chain of logic leads to but one conclusion. I have finally
decided to catch a rat.
     I understand that, now for some time, Japan has been at war with Russia. Being a
Japanese cat, I naturally side with Japan. I have even been cherishing a vague ambition to
organize some kind of Cats Brigade which, if only a scratch formation, could still inflict claw-
damage on the Russian horde. Being thus magnificently militant, why should I dither over a
miserable rat or two? So long as the will to catch them burns within me, why, I could rake them
in with my eyes shut. Long ago, when someone asked a well-known Zen priest of that ancient
time how to attain enlightenment, the priest replied “You should proceed like a cat stalking a
rat.” Indeed, such utter concentration on one’s objective is always certain to bring success.
There is, of course, that other proverb which warns against over-cleverness. The over-clever
woman may well have failed to sell her cow, but I’ve never heard it suggested that an over-
clever cat might fail to catch a rat. Thus a cat of my outstanding qualities should have no trouble
in catching any rat around. Indeed, I cannot see how I could fail to catch one. The fact that up
until now I’ve not caught any, reflects no more than my erstwhile disinclination to do so. Nothing
more than that.
     Just as yesterday, the spring sun sets and flurries of falling cherry-blossoms, whirled on
occasional gusts of the evening wind, burst in through the broken kitchen door. Floating on the
water in a kitchen pail, they glimmer whitely in the dim light of a kitchen lamp. Now that I have
decided to surprise the entire household with the feat of arms which I purpose to achieve during
the coming night, I realize that some preliminary reconnaissance of the battlefield is needed to
ensure my proper grasp of the topography of the ground. The field of maneuver is not
particularly large, covering perhaps an area of four mats. Of that area a full eighth is occupied
by the sink, while another eighth consists of that unfloored space where roundsmen from the
wine shop and the green-grocer’s stand to wait for the day’s order. The stove is unexpectedly
grand for a poor man’s kitchen and it even boasts a brilliantly shiny copper kettle. Behind the
stove, on a strip of wooden boarding about two feet wide, stands the abalone-shell in which I
am served my meals. Close to the living room there is a cupboard for plates and bowls, which,
being six feet long, severely reduces the already limited space. Beside the cupboard and
reaching roughly up to the level of its top, shelves extend along the wall, and on one of two
lower shelves there is an earthenware mortar with a small pail placed inside it upside-down. A
wooden pestle and a radish-grater hang side-by-side from hooks, and ranged beside them
there’s a dreary-looking pot for extinguishing live charcoal. From the point where the blackened
rafters cross, a pot-hook is suspended, and on that hook a large flat basket floats in midair.
Every now and again, under the pressure of the kitchen’s drafts, the basket moves with a
certain magnanimity. When I was a newcomer to this house, I simply could not understand why
this basket hung where it did, but, learning later that it was so placed specifically to prevent
cats getting at the food which it contained, I realized once again how thoroughly mean, how
preternaturally bloody-minded, are the hearts and heads of humankind.
     The reconnaissance completed, one must plan a campaign appropriate to the site. But a
battle with rats can only take place where rats are available to be fought. However brilliantly
one may position one’s forces, they can achieve nothing if they are alone upon the field. It was
thus obviously vital to determine the rats were most likely to appear.
     Standing in the middle of the kitchen, I look around and wonder from what direction they
would probably emerge. I feel as Admiral Tōgō must have done as he pondered the likeliest
course of the Russian fleet.
     That awful O-san went off to a bathhouse a little while ago and she hasn’t yet come back.
Long ago the children went to sleep. My master ate dumplings at Imozaka, came home and
has now vanished into his study. His wife, I don’t know what she’s doing but I would guess she’s
dozing somewhere deep in yammy dreams. An occasional rickshaw can be heard passing
along the street in front of the house: each subsequent silence makes the night more deep, its
desolation lonelier. My decision to take action, my sense of resolute high spirit, the waiting
kitchen-battlefield, the all-pervading feeling of loneliness: it is the perfect setting and
atmosphere for deeds of high renown. There’s no doubt about it. I am the Admiral Tōgō of the
cats. Anyone so placed must feel, however terrifying the situation, a certain wild exhilaration,
but I confess that, underneath that pleasurable excitement, I was persistently nagged by one
disquieting consideration. I have decided to do battle with rats, so I care nothing for the mere
number of the rats to be fought, but I do find it worryingly inconvenient not to know from which
direction or directions the rats will make their appearance. I have collated and analyzed the
results of my recent reconnaissance, and have concluded that there are three lines of advance
by which these robber riffraff might debouch upon the field. If they are gutter rats, they’ll come
sneaking up the drainpipe to the sink and thence nip round behind the stove. In which case, my
correct tactic is to be in hiding behind the charcoal extinguisher and thence interdict their line of
retreat. Alternatively, such villains might slide in through the hole cut at the base of the
washroom’s plaster-wall for the escape of dirty water into the outside drain: if they adopt that
point of entry, they could then sneak across the washroom and so pop out into the kitchen. In
which case, my best tactic is to station myself on the lid of the rice-cooker from which position,
as the filthy brutes glide past below me, I could drop upon them from the sky.
     Finally, my visual check of the terrain has revealed, at the bottom right-hand corner of the
cupboard, a gnawed halfmoon of a hole which looks suspiciously convenient for raiding rats.
Putting my nose to the place, I sniff the ground. It smells a little ratty. If a rat comes dashing
out to battle from that curved sally-port, my best tactic is to lurk behind the pillar and pounce
upon him from the side as he scuttles by.
     A further thought then struck me. Suppose the rats should find some line of advance along
unexpectedly higher ground. I look up and the soot-black ceiling gleams evilly in the glow of the
lamp. It looks like hell hung upside-down. It is plain that with my limited strength and skills I
could neither climb up there, still less climb down. Either because if I can’t, rats can’t, or
because if I can’t, rats wouldn’t, I decide that there’s no likelihood that they will descend from
those infernal altitudes, and I accordingly abandon any attempt to make plans to cope with that
threat.
      Even so, there’s danger of being simultaneously attacked from three directions. If they
come from only a single direction, with one eye shut I could wipe the whole lot out. If from two
directions, still I’d be able to cope. But if they come from three directions, however confident I
may be of my instinctive aptitude for catching rats, the situation would be distinctly dicey. It
would be an affront to my own dignity to go beg help from such as Rickshaw Blacky. What on
earth shall I do? When, having wondered what on earth to do, one still can’t think of anything, it
is, I’ve found, the shortest way to peace of mind to decide that what one fears won’t happen. In
point of fact, everyone chooses to assume that the insupportable will never occur. Look around
at the world. Today’s delighted bride holds no guarantee against death tomorrow, but the
bridegroom, happily chanting auspicious texts, displays no sign of worry. The fact that he
doesn’t worry is not because there’s nothing to be worried about. The reason is that, however
much he worries, it will not make the slightest difference. So, too, in my case. I’ve no reason
whatsoever to assert that simultaneous triple-pronged attacks will certainly never be launched,
but to decide that they won’t sorts best with my self-assurance. All things need assurance. Not
least myself. I have, consequently, reached the firm conclusion that attacks from three
directions will not happen.
      Even so I still feel tweaks of doubt. I pondered the cause of this continuing uneasiness and
worried away at the problem until at last I understood the source of my disquiet. It is the agony
of not being able to find a single clear-cut answer to a problem: in my case, to the problem of
deciding which of three strategies will prove most profitable. If rats emerge from the cupboard,
I have a plan to deal with the situation. If they appear from the bathroom, I have another
scheme to cope with that. And if they come sneaking up through the sink, I have yet another
wheeze worked out to settle their slithery hash. But to choose one of these three courses of
action and then stick firmly to my choice, that I find excruciatingly difficult. I hear that Admiral
Tōgō was similarly excruciated as he pondered whether the Russian Baltic Fleet would pass
through the Straits of Tsushima, or would steer a more easterly course for the Straits of
Tsugaru, or would take the longest way around by heading out into the Pacific and then
swinging back through the Straits of La Pérouse between Hokkaido and Sakhalin. My own
predicament enabled me fully to appreciate just how worried the noble Admiral must have been.
Not only am I placed in a similar situation, but I share his agony of choice.
      While I was thus absorbed in contriving a solution to my problem of major strategy, the
damaged paper-door was suddenly slid open, and the ugly face of O-san loomed into view. I
do not intend that turn of phrase to imply that that creature lacks arms and legs; simply that the
remainder of her carcass was so indistinguishable from the background darkness that only her
face, hectically bright and savagely colored, struck upon my eyes. She has just returned from
the public bathhouse, and her normally red cheeks look positively scarlet. Even though it is still
quite early, she proceeds, probably in belated wisdom learnt from last night’s happenings,
carefully to fasten up the kitchen door. From the study comes my master’s voice enjoining her
to place his walking stick at hand’s reach by his bedside. Really, I fail to see why such a man
should want to decorate his bedside with a walking stick. Can it be that he’s started to fancy
himself in the role of that heroic assassin who, so the classics tell us, attacked the first of the
Chinese Emperors? Can it be that he sees his walking stick as that tomb-treasure sword which,
at a robber’s touch, roared like a tiger, growled like a dragon, and then flew upward into the
sky? Surely not even my perplexed master could harbor such daft delusions. But yesterday it
was the yams. Now it’s a walking stick. What will it be tomorrow?
     The night is still young. The rats are not likely to appear for some time yet. I need repose
before the coming battle.
     There are no windows in my master’s kitchen. Instead, just below the level of the ceiling
there’s a sort of transom about one foot wide, which, left open all the year round, serves as a
skylight. I was brought suddenly out of my sleep by a flurry of blossoms from the early-
flowering cherries blown through that opening on a gust of wind. A hazy moonlight slants into
the kitchen and casts a shadow of the stove sidelong across the wooden floor. Wondering if I
have overslept, I shake my ears two or three times and then look carefully around to see if
anything’s developed. Dead silence reigns, through which, as was the case last night, the clock
ticks steadily on. It’s high time that the rats came out. I wonder where they will appear. It’s not
long before gentle noises start-up inside the cupboard. It sounds as though rats are trying to
get at something on a plate and are scrabbling at the plate’s edge with their horny claws. In the
expectation that these cupboard rats will eventually emerge from the gnawed halfmoon at the
bottom of its door, I hunker down to wait beside that opening. The rats seem in no hurry to
come out. Eventually the plate noise stopped, but was soon succeeded by sounds of rat feet
on some sort of bowl or basin. Every now and again there were heavy humpings on the other
side of the cupboard door, only a bare three inches distant from the tip of my waiting nose.
Sometimes the sounds come even closer to the hole, but then they scamper away again and
not one single rat so much as shows its face. Just beyond that door the foe is rampaging
through the cupboard, but all I can do is lurk here quietly at the halfmoon exit. Which calls for
patience; very great patience. The rats, like the Russians in the basin of Port Arthur, seem to
be having a rare old shindig in their bowl. I wish that that fool O-san had the mind to leave the
cupboard door at least sufficiently ajar to allow me to slip through, but what can one expect
from so thick-skulled a country bumpkin.
     From behind the stove my abalone-shell emits a sound of gentle rocking. Aha! The enemy
is also coming from that direction.Very well, then.
     I creep forward on the stealthiest of paws but catch only a glimpse of a tail among the
buckets before it whisks away below the sink. A short while later I hear the clink of my master’s
gargling glass against the metal of the wash-basin. So! Now they are behind me. As I turn to
face this new danger, a whopping great rat, at least six inches long, adroitly tips a small bag of
tooth-powder off the shelf above the basin, and then itself goes skittering away to safety under
the floorboards. Determined not to let him escape, I spring down after him, but even before I’d
landed, the filthy beast had vanished. Catching rats, I find, is trickier than I’d thought. Perhaps I
am congenitally inculpable of catching them.
     When I advance upon the bathroom, rats pop out of the cupboard.
     When I take post by the cupboard, rats erupt from the sink. And when I plant myself firmly
in the center of the kitchen, rats shoot racketing up on all three fronts together. Never have I
seen such impudent bravado combined with such poltroonery! Their skittering evasion of fair
fight brands them unworthy adversaries for a gentleman. Fifteen, maybe sixteen times I darted
hither and thither until, all to no purpose, I had exhausted myself both physically and mentally. I
am ashamed to confess my failure, but against such mean-souled adversaries even the
resourceful Admiral Tōgō would have found himself stumped. I had launched upon this venture
with high courage, a determination to subdue the foe, and even a certain elevated sense of the
spiritual beauty of my undertaking, but now, tired out and downright sleepy, I find it merely
fatuous and irksome. I cease to rush around and squat down right in the center of the kitchen.
But, though utterly motionless, if I maintain a sharp lookout all around me, the enemy, being
such miserable dastards, will never dare to try on anything serious. When, unexpectedly, one’s
enemy turns out to be so pettily paltry, the sense of war as an honorable activity cannot be
sustained and one is left with nothing but a feeling of naked hatred. When that acrid animosity
dulls, one becomes downhearted and even absent-minded. And after that general dimness
fades away, one just feels sleepy. So deep is the lethargy of complete disdain that one feels
prepared to let one’s foes do anything they like. For what of any possible significance, so one
asks oneself, are beings so debased capable of doing? Having myself gone through all those
stages, I, too, eventually grew sleepy, and dozed off. All that lives must rest, even in the midst
of enemies.
     I woke to find a violent wind blowing around me. Again, a gust was pitching handfuls of
petals through the open transom running along below the eaves. At the very moment of my
waking, something, shooting out from the cupboard like a bullet from a gun, sliced across the
blowing wind and, quick as a flash, fastened its snapping teeth into my left ear. I’d barely time
to realize what was happening before another black shadow flickered around behind me and
closed its jaws upon my tail. This all took place within the batting of an eye. Taking no thought
whatsoever, by simple reflex action I spring to my feet. Converting all my strength into a
shuddering paroxysm of my skin, I try to shake these monsters off. The demon anchored to my
ear, yanked off his feet as I sprang to mine, dangles down beside my face. The end of his tail,
spongily soft like a rubber tube, falls unexpectedly into my mouth. I take a firm grip on the
beastly object and, teeth clamped fast upon it, I waggle my head from side-to-side as hard as I
can go. The tail came off in my jaws, while the jactitated body, slung first against the wall
plastered with old newspapers, bounced off onto the floorboards. While the rat still struggles to
regain his balance, quick to seize my chance I pounce upon him, but, like some rebounding ball,
he whizzes up past my descending muzzle and lands surprisingly high on one of the upper
shelves. Tucking in his legs, he stares down at me over the edge of his shelf. I stare up at him
from the wooden floor. The distance between us is about five feet. Clean across that distance,
the moonlight slants from the transom like a woman’s broad white sash stretched out along the
air.
     Concentrating all my strength in my legs, I leapt up at the shelf. My front paws grasp its
edge but, weighted down by the rat still riveted to my tail, my hindlegs are left scrabbling in
midair. I am in danger. I try to clamber upward by judicious adjustment of the positions of my
paws, but each such effort, by reason of the rat weight on my tail, merely results in a
weakening of my pawhold. If my paws slip just one further quarter of an inch I shall be lost. I
am really in great danger. My claws scrape noisily along the wooden ledge. In a last effort, I try
to advance my left paw, but its claws fail to gain purchase in the smooth wood surface and I
finish up hanging by a single claw of my right paw. My body, dragged fully out under its own
and the rear rat’s weight, begins both to swing and to rotate. The monster on the shelf, which
has hitherto been content to sit motionless and glare at me, now hops down onto my forehead.
My last claw loses hold.
     Melded into one black lump, the three bodies plummet downward through the slanted
moonlight. Objects on the shelf below, the earthenware mortar, the small pail standing inside it,
and an empty tin, swell the falling lump which, further swollen by the dislodgement of a charcoal
extinguisher, finally splits in two. Half the ugly mass falls straight into a water jar, while the rest
disintegrates into bodies wildly rolling across the kitchen floor. In the dead quiet of night the
noise was truly appalling.
     Even my own already frantic soul was further shaken by the din.
     “Burglars!” Hoarsely bellowing, my master comes rushing out from the bedroom. He carries
a lamp in one hand and a walking stick in the other. From his sleepy eyes there flashes as
much of the light of battle as such a man could be expected ever to muster. I crouch down
silently beside my abalone-shell. The two rat-monsters vanish into the cupboard. “What’s going
on here? Who made all that hideous noise?” My master, looking vaguely sheepish, shouts in his
angriest voice questions that no one’s there to answer.
     The westering moon sank steadily lower and lower, and its broad white sash of light across
the kitchen narrowed and narrowed as it sank.
                                                III



        HIS HEAT is quite unbearable,especially for a cat. An English clergyman, a certain

T       Sydney Smith, once remarked that the weather was so intolerably hot that there was
        nothing left for it but to take off his skin and sit about in his bones. Though to be reduced
        to a skeleton might be going too far, I would at least be glad to slip out of my fur of
spotted, palish gray and send it to be washed or even popped temporarily into pawn. To human
eyes, the feline way of life may seem both extremely simple and extremely inexpensive, for a
cat’s face looks the same all the year round and we wear the same old only suit through each
of the four seasons. But cats, I can assure you, just like anyone else, feel the heat and feel the
cold. There are times when I consider that I really wouldn’t mind, just that once, soaking myself
in a bath, but if I got hot water all over my fur, it would take ages to get dry again and that is
why I grin and bear the stink of my own sweat and have never in all my life yet passed through
the entrance of a public bathhouse. Every now and again I think about using a fan but, since I
cannot hold one in my paws, the thought’s not worth pursuing.
      Compared with our simplistic style, human manners are indeed extravagant. Some things
should be eaten either raw or as they are, but humans go quite unnecessarily out of their way
to waste both time and energy on boiling them, grilling them, pickling them in vinegar, and
smarming them over with bean-paste. The horrible results of all these processes appear to
tickle them to death. In matters of dress they are similarly absurd. Inasmuch as they are born
imperfect, it might be asking too much if one expected them to wear, as is the custom of cats,
the same clothes all year long but, surely to goodness, they cannot need to swaddle their skins
in such a heterogeneity of sheer clobber. Since it seems not to shame them to be indebted to
sheep, to be dependent on silkworms, and even to accept the charity of cotton shrubs, one
could almost assert that their extravagance is an admission of incompetence.
      Even if one overlooks their oddity and allows them their perversities in matters of food and
clothing, I completely fail to see why they have to exhibit this same crass idiosyncrasy in
matters that have no bearing whatsoever on their continuing existence. Take, for instance, their
hair. Since, willy-nilly, it grows, I would have thought it simplest and best for any creature just to
leave it alone. But no. Not for humans. Totally unnecessarily, they trick themselves out in every
conceivable sort and kind of hair-do. And even take pride in their idiot variations. Those who call
themselves priests keep their heads clean-shaven blue: blue in summer, winter blue. Yet when
it’s hot they put on sunhats, and when it’s cold they hood themselves in bits of blanket. Given all
this hatting and hooding, why do they shave their heads? It’s absolutely senseless. Again, there
are some who, using a sawlike instrument called a comb, part their hair down the middle and
look as pleased as punch with the result. Others rake out an artificial separation of the hair
three-sevenths of the way across their cranial bones, and some of these extend that scraped
division right over the top of their skulls so that the hair flops out at the back like false banana-
leaves. Some have the hair on their crowns shorn flat but cut the hair at the sides, both left and
right, to hang down straight. This creation of a square frame for a round head makes them
look, if they can be said to look like anything, as though they were staring out on the world
through a cedar hedge just trimmed by a maniac gardener. In addition to these styles there are
those based on cutting every hair to a standard length: the five-inch cut, the three-inch cut, and
even the one-inch cut.
     Who knows, if such close cropping is continued, they’ll finish up with a cut inside their skulls.
Maybe the minus-one-inch cut, even a minus-three-inch cut will be the ultimate fashion. In any
event, I cannot understand why mankind becomes enslaved to such fool fads.
     Why, for instance, do they use two legs when they all have four available? Such waste of
natural resources! If they used four legs to get about, they’d all be a great deal nippier;
nevertheless, they persist in the folly of using only two and leave the other pair just hanging
from their shoulders like a couple of dried codfish that someone brought around as a present.
One can only deduce that human beings, having so very much more spare time than do cats,
lighten their natural boredom by putting their minds to thinking up such nonsenses. The odd
thing is not simply that these creatures of endless leisure assure each other, whenever two of
them get together, of just how busy they are, but that their faces do in fact look busy. Indeed
they look so fussed that one wonders just how many men get eaten by their business. I
sometimes hear them say, when they have the good fortune to make my acquaintance, how
nice and easy life could be if one lived it like a cat. If they really want their lives to be nice and
easy, it’s already in their own good power to make them so.
     Nothing stands in the way. Nobody insists that they should fuss about as they do. It is
entirely of their own free will that they make more engagements than they can possibly keep
and then complain about being so horribly busy. Men who build themselves red-hot fires
shouldn’t complain of the heat. Even we cats, if we had to think up twenty different ways of
scissoring our fur, would not for long remain as carefree as we are. Anyone who wants to be
carefree must train himself to be, like me, able to wear a fur coat in the summer. Still. . . I must
admit it is a little hot. Really, it is too hot, a fur coat in the summer.
     In this appalling heat I can’t even get that afternoon nap which is my sole and special
pleasure. How then shall I while the time away? Since I have long neglected my study of human
society, I thought I might usefully devote a few hours to watching them toiling and moiling away
in their usual freakish fashions. Unfortunately, my master’s character, at least in the matter of
napping, is more than a little aluroid. He takes his afternoon siestas no less seriously than I do
and, since the summer holidays began, he has not done a stroke of what humans would call
work.
     Thus, however closely I may observe him, I should learn nothing new about the human
condition. If only someone like Waverhouse would drop in, then there’d be some chance of a
twitch in my master’s depressingly dyspeptic skin, some hope of him stirring from his catlike
languor.
     Just is I was thinking it is indeed about time that Waverhouse dropped by, I hear the sound
of somebody splashing water in the bathroom. And it’s not just splashing water that I hear, for
the splasher punctuates his aquatics with loud expressions of his appreciation. “Perfect. How
wonderfully refreshing. One more bucketful, if you please!” The voice rings brashly through the
house. There’s only one man in the world who would speak so loudly and who would make
himself, unbidden, so very much at home in my master’s dwelling. It must, thank God, be
Waverhouse.
     I was just thinking, “Well, at least today I shall be eased of half the long day’s tedium,”
when the man himself walks straight into the living room. His shoulders recovered beneath
kimono sleeves, he’s wiping sweat from his face as, without any ceremony at all, he pitches his
hat down on the matting and calls out, “Hello there. Tell me, Mrs. Sneaze, how’s your husband
bearing up today?” Mrs. Sneaze had been comfortably asleep in the next room. Hunkered down
on her knees with her gormless face bent over onto her sewing-box, she was shocked awake
as Waverhouse’s yelpings pierced deep into her ears. When, trying to lever her sleepy eyes
wide open, she came into the room,Waverhouse, already seated in his fine linen kimono, was
happily fanning himself.
     “Good afternoon,” she says and, still looking somewhat confused, almost shyly adds, “I’d
no idea you were here.” As she bowed in greeting a bead of sweat glissades to gather at the
tip of her nose.
     “I’ve only this minute arrived. With your servant’s kind assistance I’ve just been having a
most splendid shower in the bathroom. As a result I now feel greatly refreshed. Hot, though,
isn’t it?”
     “Very hot. These last few days one’s been perspiring even when sitting still. . . But you look
as well as ever.” Mrs. Sneaze has not yet wiped the sweat-drop from her nose.
     “Thank you, yes I am. Our usual spells of heat hardly affect me at all, but this recent
weather has been something special. One can’t help feeling sluggish.”
     “How very true. I’ve never before felt need of a nap but in this weather, being so very hot. .
.”
     “You had a nap? That’s good. If one could only sleep during the daytime and then still sleep
at night. . . why, nothing could be more wonderful.” As always, he rattles along as the mood of
the moment takes him. He seems, however, this time faintly dissatisfied with what’s popped out
of his mouth, for he hurries to add, “Take me, for example.
     By nature I need no sleep. Consequently, when I see a man like Sneaze who is invariably
sleeping whenever I call, I feet distinctly envious. Well, I expect such heat is pretty rough on a
dyspeptic. On days like this even a healthy person feels too tired to balance his head on his
shoulders.
     However, since one’s head is fixed tight, one can’t just wrench it off.”
     Rather unusually,Waverhouse seems uncertain what to do with his head.
     “Now you, Mrs. Sneaze, with all that hair on your head, don’t you find it hard even to sit up?
The weight of your chignon alone must leave you aching to lie down.”
     Mrs. Sneaze, thinking that Waverhouse is referring again to her nap by drawing attention to
her disordered hair, giggles with embarrassment.
     Touching her hand to her hair, she mumbles “How unkind you are!”
     Waverhouse, totally unconscious of her reaction, goes off at a tangent. “D’you know,” he
says, “yesterday I tried to fry an egg on the roof.”
     “How’s that?”
     “The roof tiles were so marvelously baking-hot that I thought it a pity not to make practical
use of them. So I buttered a tile and broke an egg onto it.”
     “Gracious me!”
     “But the sun, you know, let me down. Even though I waited for ages, the egg was barely
half-done. So I went downstairs to read the newspapers. Then a friend dropped in, and
somehow I forgot about the egg. It was only this morning that I suddenly remembered and,
thinking it must be done by now, went up to took at it.”
     “How was it?”
     “Far from being ready to eat, it had gone completely runny. In fact, it had run away, all
down the side of the house.”
     “Oh dear.” Mrs. Sneaze frowned to show she was impressed.
     “But isn’t it strange that all through the hot season the weather was so cool and then it
should turn so hot now.”
     “Yes, indeed. Right up until recently we’ve been shivering in our summer clothes and then,
quite suddenly, the day before yesterday, this awful heat began.”
     “Crabs walk sideways but this year’s weather walks backward. Maybe it’s trying to teach
us the truth of that Chinese saying that sometimes it is reasonable to act contrary to reason.”
     “Come again,” says Mrs. Sneaze who’s not much up on Chinese proverbs.
     “It was nothing. The fact is that the way this weather is retrogressing is really just like
Hercules’ bull.” Carried away on the tide of his crankiness, Waverhouse starts making ever
more odd remarks. Inevitably, my master’s wife, marooned in ignorance, is left behind as
Waverhouse drifts off beyond the horizons of her comprehension. However, having so recently
burnt her fingers over that bit of unreasonable Chinese reason, she was not out looking for a
further scorching. So, “Oh,” she says, and sits silent. Which doesn’t, of course, suit
Waverhouse. He hasn’t gone to the trouble of dragging in Hercules’ bull not to be asked about
it.
     “Mrs. Sneaze,” he says, driven to the direct question, “do you know about ‘Hercules’ bull’?”
     “No,” she says, “I don’t.”
     “Ah, well if you don’t, shall I tell you about it?”
     Since she can hardly ask him to shut up, “Please do,” she answers.
     “One day in ancient times Hercules was leading a bull along.”
     “This Hercules, was he some sort of cowherd?”
     “Oh no, not a cowherd. Indeed he was neither a cowherd nor yet the owner of a chain of
butcher-shops. In those far days there were, in fact, no butcher-shops in Greece.”
     “Ah! So it’s a Greek story? You should’ve told me so at the start. . . ”
     At least Mrs. Sneaze has shown that she knows that Greece is the name of a country.
     “But I mentioned Hercules, didn’t I?”
     “Is Hercules another name for Greece?”
     “Well, Hercules was a Greek hero.”
     “No wonder I didn’t know his name! Well, what did he do?”
     “Like you, dear lady, he felt sleepy. And in fact he fell asleep. . . ”
     “Really! Mr. Waverhouse!”
     “And while he slept, along came Vulcan’s son.”
     “Now who’s this Vulcan fellow?”
     “Vulcan was a blacksmith, and his son stole Hercules’ bull, but in a rather special way. Can
you guess what he did? He dragged the bull off by its tail. Well, when Hercules woke up he
began searching for his bull and bellowing, ‘Bull, where are you?’ But he couldn’t find it and he
couldn’t track it down because, you see, the beast had been hauled off backward so there
weren’t any hoofmarks pointing to where it had gone. Pretty smart, don’t you agree? For a
blacksmith’s son?” Dragged off track by his own tale, Waverhouse has already forgotten that
he had been discussing the unseasonable heat.
     “By the way,” he rattled on, “what’s your husband doing? Taking his usual nap? When such
noddings-off are mentioned in Chinese poetry they sound refined, even romantic, but when, as
in your husband’s case, they happen day in, day out, the whole concept becomes vulgarized.
He has reduced an eternal elegance of life to a daily form of fragmentary death. Forgive my
asking you,” he brings his speech to a sudden conclusion, “but please do go and wake him up.”
     Mrs. Sneaze seems to agree with the Waverhouse view of naps as a form of piecemeal
perishing for, as she gets to her feet, she says, “Indeed he’s pretty far gone. Of course it’s bad
for his health. Especially right on top of his lunch.”
     “Talking of lunch, the fact is I’ve not had mine yet.” Waverhouse drops broad hints
composedly, magnanimously, as though they were pearls of wisdom.
     “Oh, I am sorry. I never thought of it. It’s lunchtime, of course. . .
     Well, would you perhaps like some rice, pickles, seaweed, things like that, and a little hot
tea?”
     “No thanks. I can manage without them.”
     “Well, as we hadn’t realized you would be honoring us today, we’ve nothing special we can
offer you.” Not unnaturally, Mrs. Sneaze responds with an edge of sarcasm, which is all quite
wasted on Waverhouse.
     “No and indeed no,” he imperturbably replies, “neither with hot tea nor with heated water.
On my way here, I ordered a lunch to be sent to your house and that’s what I’m going to eat.”
In his most matter-of-fact manner Waverhouse states his quite outrageous actions.
     Mrs. Sneaze said, “Oh!” But in that one gasped sound three separate “oh’s” were mingled:
her “oh” of blank surprise, her “oh” of piqued annoyance, and her “oh” of gratified relief. At
which moment my master comes tottering in from the study. He had just begun to doze off into
sleep when it became so unusually noisy that he was hauled back into consciousness, like
something being scraped against its natural grain.
     “You’re a rowdy fellow,” he grumbles sourly through his yawns. “Always the same. Just
when I was getting off to sleep, feeling so pleasant and relaxed. . .”
     “Aha! So you’re awake! I’m extremely sorry to have disturbed your heavenly repose, but
missing it just once in a while may even do you good. Please come and be seated.”Waverhouse
makes himself an agreeable host to my master in my master’s house. My master sits down
without a word, and, taking a cigarette from a box of wooden crazy-work, begins to puff at it.
Then, happening to notice the hat which Waverhouse had tossed away into a corner, he
observes, “I see you’ve bought a hat.”
     “What d’you think of it?” Waverhouse fetches it and holds it proudly out for the Sneazes to
inspect.
     “Oh, how pretty. It’s very closely woven. And so soft.” Mrs. Sneaze strokes it almost
greedily.
     “This hat, dear lady, is a handy hat. And as obedient as a man could wish. Look.” He
clenched his hand into a knobbly fist and drove it sharply into the side of his precious panama.
A fist-shaped dent remained, but before Mrs. Sneaze could finish her gasp of surprise,
Waverhouse whipped his hand inside the hat, gave it a sharpish shove, and the hat popped
back into shape. He then grasped the hat by opposite sides of its brim and squashed it flat as
dough beneath a rolling pin. Next he rolled it up, as one might roll a light straw mat. Finally,
saying, “Didn’t I say it was handy,” be tucked it away into the breast-fold of his kimono.
     “How extraordinary!” Mrs. Sneaze marvels as if she were watching that master magician
Kitensai Shoichi performing one of his most dazzling sleights of hand. Waverhouse himself
appears to be bitten by the spirit of his own act for, producing from his left-hand sleeve the tube
of hat he’d thrust into the breast of his kimono, he announces, “Not a scratch upon it.” He then
bats the hat back into its original shape and, sticking his forefinger into its crown, spins it
around like a conjuror’s plate. I thought the act was over, but Waverhouse proceeded neatly to
flip his whirling headgear over his head and onto the floor behind him, where, as the climax of
his performance, he sat down squarely on it with a heavy solid whump.
     “You’re sure it’s all right?” Even my master looks somewhat concerned. Mrs. Sneaze,
genuinely anxious, squeaks, “Please, you’d better stop. It would be terrible to spoil so fine a
hat.”
     Only its owner wants to keep going. “But it can’t be spoiled. That’s the wonder of it.” He
heaves the crumpled object out from under his bottom and jams it on his head. It sprang back
into shape.
     “Indeed it’s a very strong hat. Isn’t it extraordinary? Quite amazing.”
     Mrs. Sneaze is more and more impressed.
     “Oh, there’s nothing extraordinary about it. It’s just that kind of hat,” says Waverhouse
smirking out from under its brim.
     A moment later Mrs. Sneaze turns to her husband. “I think you, too, had better buy a hat
like that.”
     “But he’s already got a splendid boater.”
     “Just the other day the children trampled on it and it’s all squashed out of shape.” Mrs.
Sneaze persists.
     “Oh dear. That was a pity.”
     “That’s why I think he should buy a hat like yours, strong and splendiferous.” She has no
idea what panama hats can cost, so nothing moderates the urgency of her proddings. “Really,
my dear, you must get one, just like this. . . ”
     At this point Waverhouse produces from his right sleeve a pair of scissors in a scarlet
sheath. “Mrs. Sneaze,” he says, “forget the hat for a moment and take a look at these
scissors. They, too, are fantastically handy. You can use them in fourteen different ways.” If it
hadn’t been for those scissors my master would have succumbed to wifely pressure in the
matter of the hat. He was extremely lucky that the inborn female sense of curiosity diverted his
wife’s attention. It crossed my mind that Waverhouse had acted of intent, helpfully and tactfully,
but after careful consideration I’ve concluded that it was pure good luck that saved my master
from painful outlay on a panama hat.
     No sooner has Mrs. Sneaze responded with a, “What are the fourteen ways?” than
Waverhouse is off again in triumphantly full flow. “I shall explain each of them, so listen carefully.
All right? You see here a crescent-shaped opening? One sticks one’s cigar in here to nip its lip-
end before smoking. This gadget down here by the handle can cut through wire as though it
were mere noodle. Now if you put the scissors flat down upon paper, there’s a ruler for you.
Here, on the back-edge of this blade, there’s a scale engraved so the scissors can be used as
a measure.
     Over here there’s a file for one’s fingernails. Right? Now then, if you push this blade-tip out,
you can twist it around and around to drive screws. Thus, it serves as a hammer. And you can
use this blade-tip to lever open with the greatest of case even the most carefully nailed lid.
     Furthermore, the end of this other blade, being ground to so fine a point, makes an
excellent gimlet. With this thing you can scrape out any mistakes in your writing. And finally, if
you take the whole thing to pieces, you get a perfectly good knife. Now, Mrs. Sneaze, there’s
actually one more especially interesting feature. Here in the handle there’s a tiny ball about the
size of a fly. You see it? Well, take a peep right into it.”
      “No. I’d rather not. I’m sure you’re going to make fun of me again.”
      “I’m grieved that you should have so little confidence in me. But, just this once, take me at
my word and have a little look. No? Oh, please, just one quick squint.” He handed her the
scissors.
      Mrs. Sneaze takes them very gingerly and, setting her eyeball close to the magic spot,
does her best to see into it.
      “Well?”
      “Nothing. It’s all black.”
      “All black? That won’t do. Turn a little toward the paper-window and look against the light.
Don’t tilt the scissors like that. Right, that’s it.
      Now you can see, can’t you?”
      “Oh, my! It’s a photograph, isn’t it? How can a tiny photograph be fixed in here?”
      “That’s what’s so remarkable.” Mrs. Sneaze and Waverhouse are now absorbed in their
conversation. My master, silent now for some time but intrigued by the idea of the photograph,
seems suddenly possessed by an urge to see it. He asks his wife to let him but she, her eye
still glued to the scissors, just babbles on. “How very lovely. What a beautiful study of the
nude.” She won’t be parted from the scissors.
      “Come on, let me see it.”
      “You wait. What lovely tresses, all the way down to her hips. How movingly her face is
lifted. Rather a tall girl, I’d say, but indeed a beauty!”
      “Damn it, let me see.” My master, now distinctly marked, flares up at his wife.
      “There you are then. Gawp away to your heart’s content.” As she was handing the scissors
over, the servant trundles in from the kitchen with an announcement that Waverhouse’s meal
has been delivered. Indeed she carries with her two lidded bamboo plates loaded with cold
buckwheat noodles.
      “Aha,” says Waverhouse, “so here, Mrs. Sneaze, is the lunch I bought myself. With your
permission, I propose to eat it now.” He bows respectfully. As he seems to have spoken half in
earnest and half in jest, Mrs.
      Sneaze is at a loss how best to answer, so she just says lightly, “Please do,” and settles
back to watch.
      At long last my master drags his eyes away from the photograph and remarks, “In weather
as hot as this, noodles are bad for one’s health.”
      “No danger. What one likes seldom upsets one. In fact I’ve heard,” says Waverhouse, lifting
one of the lids, “that a little of what you fancy does you good.” He appears satisfied by what
he’s seen on the plate for he goes straight on to observe, “In my opinion noodles that have
been left to stand are, like heavily bearded men, never to be relied upon.” He adds green
horseradish to his dish of soy sauce and stirs away like mad.
      “Steady on,” says my master in genuinely anxious tones, “if you put in that much spice it’ll
be too hot to eat.”
      “Noodles must be eaten with soy sauce and green horseradish. I bet you don’t even like
noodles.”
      “I do indeed. The normal kind.”
       “That’s the stuff for pack-horse drivers. A man insensitive to cold buckwheat noodles spiced
like this is a man to be devoutly pitied.” So saying, Waverhouse digs his cedar-wood chopsticks
deep into the mass of noodles, scoops up a hefty helping and lifts it some two inches. “Did you
know, Mrs. Sneaze, that there are several styles for eating noodles?
       Raw beginners always use too much sauce and then they munch this delicacy like so many
cattle chewing the cud. That way, the exquisite savor of the noodles is inevitably lost. The
correct procedure is to scoop them up like this. . . ” Waverhouse raises his chopsticks above
the bamboo plate until a foot-long curtain of noodles dangles in the air. He looks down at the
plate to check that he’s lifted his lading clear of the plate but finds a dozen or so of the tail-ends
still lying coiled within it.
       “What very long noodles! Look, Mrs. Sneaze, aren’t they the longest that you ever saw?”
Waverhouse demands that his audience should participate, if only by interjections.
       “Indeed, they are lengthy!” she answers, as if impressed by his dissertation.
       “Now, you dip just one-third of these long strands in the sauce, then swallow them in a
single gulp. You mustn’t chew them. Mastication destroys their unique flavor. The whole point of
noodles is in the way they slither down one’s throat.” He thereupon raises his chopsticks to a
dramatic height and the ends of the longest strands at last swing clear of the plate. Then, as he
starts to lower his arm again, the tail-ends of the noodles slowly start submerging into the
sauce dish held in his left hand.
       Which, in accordance with Archimedes’ Law, causes the sauce slowly to rise in the dish as
its volume is displaced by noodles. However, since the dish was originally eight-tenths full of
sauce, the level of the liquid reached its brim before Waverhouse could get even one-quarter,
let alone the connoisseur’s one-third, of the length of his wriggling noodles into the sauce.
       The chopsticks appear paralyzed about five inches above the dish and so remain for an
awkward pause while Waverhouse considers his dilemma. If he lowers the noodles one more
fraction of an inch, the sauce must overflow, but if he does not lower them, he must fail to
conform with the standards he has established for the proper style of stuffing oneself with
noodles. No wonder he looks moithered and half-hesitates. Then, suddenly, jerking his head
and neck forward and downward like a striking snake, he jabbed his mouth at the
chopsticks,There was a slushy slurping sound, his throttle surged and receded once or twice
and the noodles were all gone.
       A few tears oozed from the corners of his eyes. To this day I am not sure whether those
tear drops were a tribute to the strength of the green horseradish or evidence of the painful
effort such gurgitation must involve.
       “What an extraordinary performance! How on earth,” enquires my flabbergasted master,
“do you contrive to gulp down such a mass of vermicelli in one consuming go?”
       “Amazing, isn’t he!” Mrs. Sneaze is equally lost in admiration.
       Waverhouse says nothing, puts down the chopsticks, and pats his chest an easing couple
of times. “Well, Mrs. Sneaze,” he eventually answers, “a plate of noodles should be consumed
in three and a half, at most in four, mouthfuls. If you drag out the process longer than that, the
noodles will not taste their best.” He wipes his face with a handkerchief and sits back to take a
well-earned breather.
       At this point who should walk in but Coldmoon. His feet are soiled with summer dust but, for
no reason I can offer, despite the broiling heat he’s wearing a winter hat.
       “Hello! Here comes our handsome hero! However, since I’m still in the middle of eating, you
must excuse me.” Waverhouse, totally unabashed, settles down to finishing off the noodles.
This time, rather sensibly, he makes no effort to give a repeat performance as a vermicelli
virtuoso, and is consequently spared the indignities of needing support from handkerchiefs and
breathers between mouthfuls. Eating normally he empties both the bamboo plates in a matter
of minutes.
     “Coldmoon,” says my master, “how’s your thesis coming along?” And Waverhouse adds,
“Since the delectable Miss Goldfield is yearning to be yours, you should in common kindness
submit the finished text as fast as possible.”
     Coldmoon breaks as usual into his disconcertingly idiot grin.
     “Inasmuch as waiting is a cruelty to her, I’d like indeed to finish it quickly,” he replies, “but
the nature of its subject is such that a great deal of drudging research is unavoidable.” He
spoke with measured seriousness of things he couldn’t possibly himself be taking seriously.
     “Quite so,” says Waverhouse adopting Coldmoon’s style with contra-puntal skill. “The
subject being what it is, naturally it cannot be handled just as Coldmoon wishes. Nevertheless,
that nasality her mother being the snorter that she is, naturally it would be prudent to trim one’s
sails to the way she blows.”
     The only relatively sensible comment comes from my master. “What did you say was the
subject of your thesis?”
     “It is entitled ‘The Effects of Ultraviolet Rays upon Galvanic Action in the Eyeball of the
Frog.’”
     “Remarkable. Just what one might expect from Coldmoon. I like both the rhythm and the
substantial originality of that last bit, the electrifying shock in that ‘eyeball of the frog.’ How
about it, Sneaze? Ought we not to inform the Goldfields of at least the title before our scholar
finishes his paper?”
     My master, disregarding these waggeries from Waverhouse, asks Coldmoon, “Can such a
subject really involve much drudgery of research?”
     “Oh yes, it’s a complicated question. For one thing, the structure of the lens in the eyeball
of the frog is by no means simple. Hundreds, even thousands, of experiments will have to be
carried out. For a start I’m planning to construct a round glass ball.”
     “A glass ball? Surely, you could find one quite easily in a glass shop?”
     “Oh, no, far from it,” says Coldmoon, throwing out his chest a little.
     “To begin with, things like circles and straight lines are pure geometrical concepts, and
neither actual circles nor actual straight lines can, in this imperfect world, ever realize such
idealities.”
     “If they can never exist, hadn’t you better abandon the attempt to create them?” butts in
Waverhouse.
     “Well, I thought I’d begin by making a ball suitable for my experiments and, in fact, I started
on it the other day.”
     “And have you finished it?” asks my master as if the task were an easy matter.
     “How could I?” says Coldmoon, but then, realizing perhaps that he’s getting close to self-
contradiction, hurries on to explain. “It’s really frightfully difficult. After I’ve filed it for some time,
I notice that the radius on one side is too long, so I grind it fractionally shorter, but this leads on
to trouble, because now I find the radius on the other side excessive. When, with great effort I
grind that excess off, the entire ball becomes misshapen. After I’ve at last corrected that
distortion, I discover that the diametrical dimensions have, somehow or other, once more gone
agley. The glass ball, originally the size of an apple, soon becomes a strawberry and, as I
patiently struggle for perfection, it rapidly shrinks to no more than a bean. Even then, it’s not a
perfect sphere. Believe me, I have striven. . . I have dedicated my whole life to the grinding of
glass balls.
    Since New Year’s Day no less than six of them, admittedly of differing sizes, have melted
away to nothing in these hands. . .” He speaks with such rare passion that no one could say
whether or not he’s telling the truth.
    “Where do you do this grinding?”
    “In the university laboratory of course. I start grinding in the morning. I take a short rest for
lunch, and then continue grinding until the light fails. It’s not an easy job.”
    “D’you mean to say that you go down to the university day after day, including Sundays,
simply to grind glass balls? Is that what keeps you, as you’re always telling us, so inexorably
busy?”
    “That’s correct. At this stage in my studies I have no choice but to grind glass balls
morning, noon, and night.”
    “I seem to recall,” says Waverhouse, now very much in his element, “a Kabuki play in which
one character gains his ends by disguising himself as a gardener.” He strikes an attitude and
quotes, “‘As I was luckily brought up among civilian non-officials, no one knows my face: so I
enter as a cultivator of chrysanthemums.’ You, Coldmoon, seem bent on gaining your ends
disguised as a cultivator of crystals. For I’m sure that when the mother of all noses learns of
your ardor, your single-minded dedication to your work, your selfless devotion to the grinding of
glass balls, she cannot fail to warm toward you.
    Incidentally, the other day I had some work to do in the university library and, as I was
leaving, I chanced to bump into an old colleague, Knarle-Damson, at the door. Thinking it
peculiar that, years after his graduation, he should still be using the library, I said to him,
‘Knarle-Damson,’ I said, ‘I’m most impressed, Knarle-Damson, to find you still imbibing at the
fount of learning.’ He gave me a very odd look and explained that, far from wanting to consult a
book, he’d been caught short as he passed the university and had just popped in for a pee. A
curious use for a seat of learning. However, it’s just occurred to me that you and Knarle-
Damson both exemplify, though in contrasting styles, how to misuse a university. You will, of
course, have read that Chinese classic which is constructed from pairs of parallel anecdotes,
one ancient and one modern, about famous men. I am proposing to bring out a new selection
along similar lines and, with your permission, will include therein a short section on glass balls
and urinals.”
    My master, however, took a more serious view of the matter. “It’s all very well,” he said, “to
pass your days frotting away at glass but when do you expect to finish your thesis and get your
doctorate?”
    “At my present rate of progress, maybe in ten years.” Coldmoon seems far less concerned
than my master about the doctorate.
    “Ten years, eh? I think you’d better bring your grinding to a halt rather sooner than that.”
    “Ten years is an optimistic estimate. It could well take me twenty.”
    “That’s terrible. You can’t, then, hope for a doctorate for a long time.”
    “No. Of course I’d be only too happy to get it quickly, and so set the young lady’s mind at
rest, but until I’ve got the glass ball properly ground, I can’t even launch out on my first
experiment.” Coldmoon’s voice trailed off into silence as though his mind were staring into the
lens of a frog’s eyeball but, after a brief pause, he continued. “There’s no need, you know, to
get so worried about it. The Goldfields are fully aware that I do nothing but grind away at these
glass balls. As a matter of fact, I gave them a fairly detailed explanation when I saw them just a
few days back.” He smiled in quiet complacence.
      Mrs. Sneaze who, though hardly understanding a word of it, has been listening to the three
men’s conversation, interjects in a puzzled voice,
      “But the whole Goldfield family has been away at the seaside, out at Oiso, since last
month.”
      This flummoxes even Coldmoon, but he maintains a pretense of innocence. “How very odd,”
he says, “I can’t understand it.”
      There are occasions when Waverhouse fulfills a useful social function.
      When a conversation flags, when one is embarrassed, when one becomes sleepy, when
one is troubled, then, as on all other occasions, Waverhouse can be relied upon to have
something immediate and diverting to say. “To have met someone a few days back in Tokyo
who had gone to Oiso last month is engagingly mysterious. It is an example, is it not, of the
exchange of souls. Such a phenomenon is likely to occur when the sentiment of requited love is
particularly poignant. When one hears of such a happening, it sounds like a dream, but, even if
it is a dream, it is a dream more actual than reality. For someone like you, Mrs. Sneaze, who
were married to Sneaze not because you loved him or because he loved you, life has never
given an opportunity for you to understand the extraordinary nature of love: so it is only natural
that you should find odd the disparities you mentioned. . .”
      “I don’t know why you should say such nasty things. Why are you always getting at me like
this?” Mrs. Sneaze rounds snappishly on Waverhouse.
      “What’s more, you yourself don’t look like a man who has any experience of the pangs of
love.” My master brings up reinforcements in surprising support of the frontline position manned
by his wife.
      “Well, since all my love affairs were over long before the nine days back that might have
made them wonders, you doubtless don’t remember them. But it remains a fact that it was a
disappointment in love that has made me, to this day, a lonely bachelor.” Waverhouse leveled a
steady look upon each of his listeners, one after the other.
      It was Mrs. Sneaze who laughed, though she added, “But how interesting.”
      My master said, “Bosh,” and turned to stare off into the garden.
      Coldmoon, though he grinned, said politely, “I would like, for my own future benefit, to hear
the story of your ancient love.”
      “My story, too, contains elements of the mysterious. So much so that, if he were not
lamentably dead, it must have moved the interest of the late Lafcadio Hearn. I am, I must
confess, a little reluctant to tell this painful tale but, since you insist, I’ll confide in you all on the
sole condition that you listen carefully to the very end.” They promised, and he starts.
      “As well as I can recollect. . . it was. . . hum. . . how many years ago was it, I wonder. . .
Never mind, let’s say it was maybe fifteen or sixteen years ago.”
      “Incorrigible,” snorts my master.
      “You do have a very poor memory, don’t you, Mr. Waverhouse?” Mrs.
      Sneaze puts in a jabbing oar.
      Coldmoon is the only person who, keeping the promise, says nothing but wears the
expression of a man eagerly waiting for the remainder of a story.
      “Anyway, it was in the winter, some years back. Having passed through the Valley of the
Bamboo Shoots at Kambara in Echigo, I was climbing up through the Pass of the Octopus Trap
on my way to the Aizu territory.”
      “What odd-named places!” My master interrupts again.
      “Oh, do keep quiet and listen. This is getting interesting.” Mrs. Sneaze reins back her
husband.
      “Unfortunately, it was getting dark. I lost my way. I was hungry. So, in the end, I was
obliged to knock at the door of a hut way up in the middle of the Pass. Explaining my
predicament, I begged for a night’s lodging. And do you know, the minute that I saw the face of
the girl who, thrusting a lit candle out toward me, answered, ‘Of course, please enter,’ my
whole body began to tremble. Since that moment I’ve been very acutely conscious of the
supernatural power of that blind force we call love.”
      “Fancy that,” says Mrs. Sneaze. “Are there really, I wonder, many beautiful girls living up
there in those godforsaken mountains?”
      “It hardly matters that I found her in the mountains. It might just as well have been beside
the seaside. But, oh Mrs. Sneaze, would that you could have seen her, if only for a glance. . .
She wore her hair in the high-dressed fashion of a marriageable girl. . .”
      Mrs. Sneaze, rendered speechless by the wonder of it all, gives vent to a long-drawn sigh.
      “On entering the hut, I found a big fireplace sunk in the center of an eight-mat room, and
soon the four of us—the girl, her grandfather, her grandmother, and myself—were sitting
comfortably around it. They said I must be very hungry. And I was. Very. So I asked for some
food, anything, no matter what, so long as I might have it quickly. The old man said,‘It’s seldom
we have visitors, so let’s prepare snake-rice in honor of our guest.’ Now then, this is where I
come to the story of my disappointment in love, so listen carefully.”
      “Of course we’ll listen carefully,” says Coldmoon, “but I find it hard to believe that even out
in the wilds of Echigo there are snakes around in the winter.”
      “Well, that’s a fair observation. But in a romantic story such as this, one shouldn’t be too
scrupulous over the logic of its details. Why, in one of Kyoka’s novels, you’ll find a crab crawling
out of the snow.”
      “I see,” said Coldmoon who thereupon resumed his serious attitude of listening.
      “In those days I was outstandingly capable, really in the champion class, of eating ugly
foods, but, being more or less wearied of locusts, slugs, red frogs, and such like, I thought
snake-rice sounded like a welcome change. So I told the old man I’d be delighted. He then set
a pot on the fire and put some rice inside it. Slowly it began to cook. The only oddity was that
there were about ten holes of various sizes in the lid of the pot. Through these holes, the steam
came fuffing up. I was really fascinated by the effect and I remember thinking how ingenious
these country people were. Just then, the old man suddenly stood up and went out of the hut. A
while later, he came back with a large basket under his arm and, when he put it casually down
beside the hearth, I took a look inside. Well, there they were. Snakes, and all of them long
ones, coiled up tight, as Coldmoon will appreciate, in their winter torpor.”
      “Please stop talking about such nasty things. It’s quite revolting,” says Mrs. Sneaze with a
girlish shudder.
      “Oh I can’t possibly stop, for all these matters lie at the bottom of my broken-heartedness.
Well, by and by, the old man lifted the pot’s lid with his left hand while with his other he nimbly
grabbed up a wad of snakes from the basket. He threw them into the pot and popped the lid
back on. And I must admit that, though I’m neither squeamish nor particularly scared of snakes,
the old man’s nonchalant action did, at that moment, leave me gasping.”
     “Oh, please do stop. I can’t stand gruesome stories.” Mrs. Sneaze is actually quite
frightened.
     “Very soon now I’ll be coming to the broken-hearted bit, so please just do be patient. Well,
barely a minute had passed when, to my great surprise, a snake’s head popped out of a hole in
the lid. I’d barely realized what it was before another one popped its face out from a
neighboring hole, and I’d barely registered that second head before another and another and
another erupted into view until the whole lid was studded with snakes’ faces.”
     “Why did they stick their heads out?” asks my master.
     “Because, in agony, they were trying to crawl away from the heat building up inside the pot.
After a while the old man said, speaking, naturally, in his local dialect, something like, ‘Right
then, give ’em the old heave-ho.’ His wife said, ‘Aye’ and the girl said, ‘Yes’ and each of them,
grasping a snake’s head firmly, gave it a savage yank. While the flesh remained in the pot, the
head and a length of bones came waggling free in their hands.”
     “What you might call boned snake?” asks Coldmoon with a laugh.
     “Yes, indeed. Boned, or even spineless. But wasn’t it all exceedingly clever? They lifted the
lid, took a ladle, stirred the rice and the snake-flesh into one great wonderful mishmash and
then invited me to tuck in.”
     “Did you actually eat it?” asks my master in a slightly edgy sort of voice.
     His wife makes a sour face and grumblingly complains. “I do so wish you’d all stop talking
about it. I’m feeling sick right down to my stomach, and I shan’t dare eat for days.”
     “You only say that, Mrs. Sneaze, because you’ve never had the luck to taste snake-rice. If
you but tried it once, you’d never forget its exquisite flavor.”
     “Never. Nothing on earth could induce me to touch the nasty stuff.”
     “Anyway, I dined well. I forgot the bitter cold. I studied the girl’s face to my heart’s content
and, though I could happily have stared at her forever, when they suggested I should go to
sleep, I remembered that I was in fact dog tired from my traveling. So I took their advice and
laid down, and before long everything blurred and I was fast asleep.”
     “And what happened then?” This time it’s Mrs. Sneaze who urges him to continue.
     “When I woke up next morning, heartache had set in.”
     “Did anything happen to you?” asks Mrs. Sneaze.
     “No, nothing special happened to me. I just woke up and, while I was smoking a cigarette, I
chanced to look out through the back window, and there I saw, washing its face in the water
flowing from a bamboo-pipe, someone as bald as a kettle.”
     “The old man,” asks my master, “or the old woman?”
     “At first I couldn’t tell. I sat there watching it in vague distaste for quite some time and,
when at last the kettle turned towards me, I got the shock of my life. For it was the girl to
whom I had already lost my heart.”
     “But you said earlier that she wore her hair in the style of a marriageable girl,” my master
promptly objects.
     “The night before, unmitigated beauty: in the morning, unmitigated kettle.”
     “Really! What balderdash will you trot out next.” As is usual when he feels put out, my
master stares at the ceiling.
     “Naturally, I was most deeply shocked, even a little frightened, but, making myself
inconspicuous, I continued to watch. At long last the kettle finished washing its face, featly
donned the wig waiting on a nearby stone and then came tripping primly back to the hut. I
understood everything. But though I understood, I have from that moment been a man incurably
wretched, a man with a broken heart.”
      “The silliest broken heart that ever was. Observe, my dear Coldmoon, how gay and lively
he contrives to be despite his broken heart.”Turning toward Coldmoon, my master registers his
low opinion of his friend’s disastrous love affair.
      “But,” says Coldmoon, “if the girl had not been bald, and if Waverhouse had brought her
back with him to Tokyo, he might now be livelier than he is. The fact remains that it is infinitely
pitiable that the young lady happened to be bald. But tell me, Waverhouse, how did it come
about that a girl so young should have lost her hair?”
      “Well, naturally I’ve thought about that too, and I’m certain now that the depilation must be
due entirely to over-indulgence in snake-rice. It goes to the head, you know. It drives the blood
upward, damaging the capillaries in the follicles of the scalp.”
      “I’m so glad nothing so terrible happened to you,” says Mrs. Sneaze with an undertone of
sarcasm.
      “It is true that I was spared the affliction of going bald, but instead, as you can see, I have
become a presbyope.” Taking off his goldrimmed spectacles, he polishes them carefully with
his pocket handkerchief.
      There was a short silence. To be a presbyope sounded so awful that none dared ask for an
explanation. But my master, possibly being made of sterner stuff, possibly because he knows
that nearsightedness is more often caused by the passing of the years than by one night’s meal
of snake-rice, was not yet done.
      “I seem to remember,” he eventually said,“that you mentioned some mystery that would
have moved the interest of Lafcadio Hearn. What mystery?”
      “Did she buy the wig or simply pick it up, and, if she picked it up, where? That,” said
Waverhouse, replacing his spectacles on his nose, “is the mystery. To this day I cannot work it
out.”
      “It’s just like listening to a comic storyteller,” says Mrs. Sneaze.
      As Waverhouse’s improbable tale had come to its conclusion, I thought he might shut-up.
But no. He appears by nature incapable of keeping quiet unless actually gagged. For he’s at it
again already.
      “My disappointment in love was, of course, a bitter experience: but had I married that
heavenly girl in ignorance of kettledom, the matter would have remained a lifelong cause of
friction. One has to be careful.
      In matters like marriage, one tends only to discover at the very last moment hidden defects
in unexpected places. I therefore advise you, Coldmoon, not to waste your youth in futile
yearnings or in pointless despair but to keep on grinding away at your balls of glass with an
easy mind and heart.”
      “I’d be happy,” answers Coldmoon, “to do nothing more. However, the Goldfield ladies, to
my considerable botheration, do keep on at me.”
      He grimaces in exaggerated annoyance.
      “True. You are, in your case, somewhat put upon. But there are many comic cases of
people thrusting themselves forward to invite disquiet.
      Take, for example, the case of Knarle-Damson, that well-known piddler upon seats of
learning. His was extremely odd.”
      “What did he do?” asks my master, entering into the swing of the conversation.
      “Well, it was like this. Once upon a long, long time ago, he stayed at the East-West Inn in
Shizuoka. Just for one night, mind you, but that same evening he offered marriage to one of the
servants working there.
      I myself am pretty easy-going, but I would not find it easy to go as far as that. The fact
was, that in those days one of the maids at that Inn, they called her Summer, was a raving
beauty, and it just so happened that she looked after Knarle-Damson’s room, so he could not
help but meet her.”
      “The meeting was no doubt fated, just like yours in that something-or-other pass,” observes
my master.
      “Yes, there is some resemblance between the cases. Indeed, there are obvious similarities
between Knarle-Damson and myself. Anyway, he proposed to this Summer girl but, before she
gave her answer, he felt a need for watermelon.”
      “Huh?” My master looks puzzled. And not only he, for both his wife and Coldmoon cock
their heads sideways as they try to see the connection. Waverhouse disregards them all and
proceeds blithely with his story.
      “He summoned the girl and asked her if one could get a watermelon in Shizuoka. She
replied that, though the town was not as up-to-date as Tokyo, even in Shizuoka watermelons
could be had, and almost immediately she brought him a tray heaped high with slices of the
fruit. So, while waiting for her answer, Knarle-Damson scoffed the lot. But before she gave her
answer, Knarle-Damson got the gripes. He groaned away like mad but, since that didn’t help,
he summoned the girl again and this time asked if there was a doctor available. The girl replied
that, though the town was not as up-to-date as Tokyo, still, even in Shizuoka, doctors were
available, and in a matter of minutes she ushered one in to his room. The doctor, incidentally,
had a very odd name, something like Heaven-and-Earth, anyway something obviously cribbed,
for effect, from the Chinese classics. Well, next morning when Knarle-Damson woke up, he
was to find his gut-ache gone, and, some fifteen minutes before he was due to leave, he again
summoned the Summer girl and asked for her answer to his proposal of marriage. The girl
replied with laughter. She then said that down in Shizuoka it is possible to find doctors and
watermelons at very short notice but that, even in Shizuoka, few find brides in a single night.
She turned, went out of the room and that was the last he saw of her. And ever since that day,
Knarle-Damson has remained, like me, a man scarred by a disappointment in love.
      Almost a recluse, he’ll only go to a library when pressed there by his bladder. Which all
goes to show the wickedness and cruelty of women.”
      My master, most unusually, comes out this time in strong support of Waverhouse’s theme.
“How right you are,” he says, “how very right. Just the other day I was reading one of de
Musset’s plays in which some character quoted Ovid to the effect that, lighter than a feather is
dust; than dust, wind; than wind, woman; but than woman, nothing. A very penetrating
observation, isn’t it? Women are indeed the dreaded end.” My master adopts an exceedingly
cavalier attitude, but his wife, of course, is not going to let these flourishes pass unchallenged.
      “You complain about women being light, but I can’t see any particular merit in the fact that
men are heavy.”
      “What do you mean by heavy?”
      “Heavy is just heavy. Like you.”
     “Why d’you say I’m heavy?”
     “Because you are heavy.Very heavy.”
     They’re off on one of their crazy arguments again. For a time Waverhouse just sits there,
listening with amusement to their increasingly bitter bickering, but eventually he opens his
mouth.
     “The way you two go on at each other, hammering away until you’re red in the face, is
perhaps the clearest possible demonstration that you truly are husband and wife. I’m inclined to
think that marriage in the old days was a less meaningful thing than it is today.” None of his
listeners could tell whether he was teasing or complimenting his host and hostess but, since
their bickering was halted, he could with profit have just stopped there. But that’s not the way of
a Waverhouse, who always has more to say.
     “I hear that in the old days no woman would have dreamt of answering back to her
husband. From the man’s point of view it must have been like marriage to a deaf-mute. I
wouldn’t have liked that. Not one little bit. I certainly prefer women who, like you, Mrs. Sneaze,
have the spirit to retort,‘Because you are heavy,’ or something else in the same vein.
     If one is to be married, it would be insupportably boring never to have the liveliness of an
occasional spat. My mother, for instance, spent her whole life saying,‘Yes’ and ‘You’re right’ to
my frequently foolish father.
     She lived with him for twenty or so assenting years, and in all that stretch she never set
foot outside the house except to go to a temple.
     Really, it’s too pitiful. There were, of course, advantages. Thus my mother has the
enormous satisfaction of knowing that she knows by heart the full posthumous names of all my
family’s ancestors. This hideous sort of relationship did not exist simply between man and wife
but extended to cover the whole range of relations between the sexes. When I was a lad it was
quite out of the question for a young man and a young woman even to play music together.
There was no such thing as a lovers’ meeting. They couldn’t even meet in the world of the spirit,
like Coldmoon here, by a long range swap of souls.”
     “It must have been awful,” says Coldmoon with a sort of shrinking bow.
     “Indeed it was. One weeps for one’s ancestors. Still, women in those days were not
necessarily any better behaved than the women of today.
     You know, Mrs. Sneaze, people talk down their noses about the depraved conduct of
modern, girl students, but the truth is that things were very much worse in those so-called good
old days.”
     “Really?” Mrs. Sneaze is serious.
     “Of course. I’m not just making it up. I can prove what I say. You, Sneaze, will probably
remember that when we were maybe five or six there were men going about in the streets with
two panniers hanging down from each end of their shoulder-poles, and in the panniers, like so
many pumpkins, they had little girls for sale. You remember?”
     “I don’t remember anything of the sort.”
     “I don’t know how things were in your part of the country, but that’s most certainly the way
it was in Shizuoka.”
     “Surely not,” murmurs Mrs. Sneaze.
     “Do you mean that for a fact?” asks Coldmoon in a tone of voice that shows he can’t quite
credit it.
     “For an absolute, rock hard fact. I can even remember how once my father haggled over
the price of one. I must then have been about six. As my father and I were coming out of a side
street into the main thoroughfare, we saw a man approaching us who was bawling out,‘Girls for
sale! Girls for sale! Anyone want a baby girl?’When we reached the corner of the second block
in the street, we came face-to-face with this hawker, just in front of the draper’s. Isegen’s it
was. Isegen is quite the biggest draper in Shizuoka with a sixty-foot frontage and five
warehouses. Have a look at it the next time you’re down there. It’s just the same today as it
was then. Quite unaltered. A fine building. The chief clerk’s name is Jimbei, and he sits at his
counter with the invariable expression of a man who’s lost his mother only three days back.
Sitting right beside Jimbei you’ll find a young man of twenty-four, maybe twenty-five, whose
name is Hatsu. Hatsu’s very pale. He looks like one of those novices who, in demonstration of
their devotion to the thirty-third priest-prince of the Shingon Sect, take nothing but buckwheat-
water for twenty-one days at a stretch. And next to Hatsu there’s Chodon.
      Chodon’s the one who’s hunched dejectedly above his abacus as though but yesterday he
lost his home in a fire. And next to Chodon. . .”
      “Come off it,Waverhouse,” snaps my master. “Is this a chanting of the genealogy of your
draper or is it a tale about the maiden-mongers of Shizuoka?”
      “Ah yes. I was telling you the story of the maiden-mongers. As a matter of fact, there’s an
extremely strange story I was going to tell you about that draper’s, but I’ll cut it out and
concentrate on the sellers of little girls.”
      “Why not cut that too?” suggests my master.
      “Oh no! I wouldn’t feel right if I abandoned that story. For it provides exceedingly valuable
data by which to compare the characters of modern women with those of their predecessors in
the early Meiji Era. Now, as I was saying, when my father and I arrived in front of Isegen, the
maiden-monger addressed my father in these terms: ‘’ow about one of these ’ere little
leftovers? Take a toddler, sir, and I’ll make ’er special cheap.’ He’s put his shoulder-pole down
on the ground and is wiping sweat from his brow. In each of the two dumped panniers there’s a
little girl about two-years-old. My father says,‘If they’re really cheap, I might, but is this all
you’ve got?’ The man replies respectfully, ‘Yes, sir, I’m afraid so. Today I’ve sold I ’em all, ’cept
for these two little ’uns. Take your choice.’ He holds the little girls up in his hands like, as I told
you, pumpkins, and he pushes them under my father’s nose. My father taps on their heads as
one might rap a melon and says,‘Yes, they sound quite good.’ The negotiations then begin in
earnest and, after a great deal of chaffering, my father finally says,‘That’s all very well, but can
you guarantee their quality?’ ‘Yes,’ says the man. ‘That ’un in the leading basket, I can take me
oath is sound, ’cos I’ve ’ad ’er all day long right in front of me own two peepers, but t’other in
the back-side basket could be a wee mite cracked. I’ve not got eyes in the back of me ’ead, so
I won’t go making no promises. Tell you what, just for you, I’ll knock a bit more off for that ’un.’
To this day I can clearly remember every word of their dickering and, though only a nipper
myself, I did then learn how insidiously cracked a little girl can be. However, in this thirty-eighth
year of the Emperor’s reign there’s none so foolish now as to go trotting through the streets
with little girls for sale. So one no longer hears people saying how those at the back, those that
one can’t keep one’s own sharp watchful eye on, are liable to be damaged. It is consequently
my opinion that, thanks to the beneficent influx of Western civilization, the conduct of women
has in fact improved. What do you think, Coldmoon?”
      Coldmoon hesitated, cleared his throat and then gave his opinion in a low and measured
tone. “Women today, on their way to and from schools, at concerts, at charity parties and at
garden parties, are, in effect, already selling themselves. Their light behavior is tantamount to
such statements as, ‘Hey, how about buying me?’ or ‘Oh, so you’re not much interested!’There
is accordingly no contemporary need for hawkers or other middlemen selling on commission,
and the street cries of our modern cities are of course the poorer by the disappearance of
maiden-mongers shouting their wares. Such changes are bound to follow from the introduction
and dissemination of modern ideas of the individual’s independence. The older generation get
unnecessarily worked up and moan and groan as though the world were coming to its end, but
that’s the trend of modern civilization and I, for one, welcome and encourage these changes.
For instance, there’s no need nowadays for anyone to go tapping poor tots on the skull to see if
they’re good enough to buy. In any case, no one ever gets anywhere in this hard world by being
unduly choosey. That way, one can easily end up husbandless and, even after fifty or sixty
years of assiduous search, still not be a bride.”
      Coldmoon, very much a bright young man of this twentieth century, spoke for his generation
and, having so spoken, blew cigarette smoke into Waverhouse’s face. But Waverhouse is not a
man to flinch from a mere residue of burnt tobacco. “As you say,” he responded, “among
schoolgirls and young ladies, nowadays their very flesh and bones are permeated with, if not
actually manufactured out of, self-esteem and self-confidence, and it is indeed admirable that
they should prove themselves a match for men in every possible field. Take, for instance, the
girls at the high school near my house. They’re terrific. Togged out in trousers, they hang
themselves upside-down from iron wall-bars. Truly, it’s wonderful. Every time that I look down
from my upstairs window and see them catapulting about at their gymnastics, I am reminded of
ancient Grecian ladies pursuing strength and beauty through the patterns of calisthenics.”
      “Oh, no. Not the Greeks again,” says my master with something like a sneer.
      “It’s unavoidable. lt just so happens that almost everything aesthetically beautiful seems to
have originated in Greece. Aesthetics and the Greeks: you speak of one and you are speaking
of the other. When I see those dark-skinned girls putting their whole hearts into their
gymnastics, into my mind, invariably, leaps the story of Agnodice.” He’s wearing his font-of-all-
wisdom face as he babbles on and on.
      “So you’ve managed to find another of those awkward names,” says Coldmoon with his
usual, witless grin.
      “Agnodice was a wonderful woman. When I look back at her across the gulf of centuries,
still I am impressed. In those far days the Laws of Athens forbade women to be midwives. It
was most inconvenient. One can easily see why Agnodice thought it unreasonable.”
      “What’s that? What’s that word?”
      “Agnodice. A woman. It’s a woman’s name. Now this woman said to herself, ‘It’s really
lamentable that women cannot be midwives, inconvenient, too. I wish to God I could become a
midwife. Isn’t there any way I can?’ So she thought and thought, doing nothing else for three
straight days and nights, and just at dawn on the third day, as she heard the yowling of a babe
newborn next door, the solution flashed upon her.
      She immediately cut off her long hair, dressed herself as a man, and took to attending the
lectures on childbirth then being given by the eminent Hierophilus. She learnt all that he could
teach and, feeling her time had come, set up as a midwife. D’you know, Mrs. Sneaze, she was
a great success. Here, there, and everywhere yowling babies put in their appearance, and,
since they were all assisted by Agnodice, she made a fortune. However, the ways of Heaven
are proverbially inscrutable. For seven ups there are eight downs. And it never rains but it
pours. Her secret was discovered. She was hauled before the courts. And she stood in danger
of the direst punishment for breaking the laws of Athens.”
      “You sound just like a professional storyteller,” says Mrs. Sneaze.
      “Aren’t I good? Well then, at that point all the women of Athens got together and signed
such an enormous round robin in support of Agnodice that the magistrates felt unable to ignore
it. In the end she was let off, and the laws were changed to allow women to become midwives,
and they all lived happily ever after.”
      “You do know about so many things. It’s wonderful,” sighs Mrs. Sneaze.
      “True. I know almost everything about almost everything. Perhaps the only thing I don’t
know all about is the real extent of my own foolishness. But even on that, I can make a pretty
good guess.”
      “You do say such funny things. . .” Mrs. Sneaze was still chortling away when the front
doorbell, its tone unchanged since the day it was first installed, began to tinkle.
      “What! another visitor!” squeaked Mrs. Sneaze and scuttled off into the living room.
      And who should it be but our old friend Beauchamp Blowlamp. With his arrival the entire
cast of the eccentrics who haunt my master’s house was gathered upon stage. Lest that should
sound ungracious, perhaps I could better emphasize that sufficient eccentrics are gathered to
keep a cat amused, and it would indeed be ungracious if I were not satisfied with that. Had I
had the misfortune to dwell in some other household, I might have lived nine lives and never
known that such remarkable scholars, that even one such remarkable scholar, could be found
among mankind. I count myself fortunate to be sitting here, his adopted cat-child, beside my
noble master. It is, moreover, a rare privilege to be numbered among the disciples of Professor
Sneaze: for only thus am I enabled, comfortably lying down, to observe the manners and
actions not only of my master but of such heroic figures, such matchless warriors, as
Waverhouse, Coldmoon, and the bold Sir Beauchamp. Even in this vast city, such personages
are rare, and I take it as the highest accolade that I am accepted by them as one of their
company. It is only the consciousness of that honor that enables me to forget the hardship of
being condemned to endure this heat in a fur bag. And I am especially grateful thus to be kept
amused for a whole half-day. Whenever the four of them get together like this, something
entertaining is bound to transpire, so I watch them respectfully from that draft-cooled place by
the door to which I have retired.
      “I’m afraid I haven’t been around to see you for quite some time,” says Beauchamp with a
modest bow. His head, I notice, shines as brightly as it did the other day. Judged by his head
alone, he might be taken for a second-rate actor, but the ceremonious manner in which he
wears his very stiff white cotton hakama makes him look like nothing so much as a student-
swordsman from the fencing-school of Sakakibara Kenkichi.
      Indeed, the only part of Beauchamp’s body which looks in the least bit normal is the section
between his hips and his shoulders.
      “Well, how nice of you to call. In this hot weather, too. Come right in.”Waverhouse, as
usual, plays the host in someone else’s home.
      “I haven’t seen you for a long time, sir,” Beauchamp says to him.
      “Quite so. Not, I believe, since that Reading Party last spring. Are you still active in that
line? Have you again performed the part of a high-class prostitute? You did it very well. I
applauded you like mad. Did you notice?”
      “Yes, I was much encouraged. Your kind appreciation gave me the strength to carry on until
the end.”
     “When are you having your next meeting?” interjects my master.
     “We rest during July and August but we hope to be livening up again in September. Can you
suggest anything interesting we might tackle?”
     “Well,” my master answers half-heartedly.
     “Look here, Beauchamp,” says Coldmoon suddenly, “Why don’t you try my piece?”
     “If it’s yours, it must be interesting, but what’s this piece you’ve written?”
     “A drama,” says Coldmoon with all the brass-faced equanimity he could muster. His three
companions are dumbfounded, and stare upon him with looks of unanimous wonder.
     “A drama! Good for you! A comedy or tragedy?” Beauchamp was the first to recover and
find his tongue. With the utmost composure.
     Coldmoon gives his reply.
     “It’s neither a comedy nor a tragedy. Since people these days are always fussing about
whether a play should be old-style drama or new-style drama, I decided to invent a totally new
type and have accordingly written what I call a haiku-play.”
     “What on earth’s a haiku-play?”
     “A play imbued with the spirit of haiku.” My master and Waverhouse, apparently dazed by
the concept of an essentially tiny poem blown out to the length of a play, say nothing, but
Beauchamp presses on.
     “How do you implement that interesting idea?”
     “Well, since the work is of the haiku mode, I decided it should not be too lengthy or too
viciously clear-cut. It is accordingly a one act play, in fact a single scene.”
     “I understand.”
     “Let me first describe the setting. It must, of course, be very simple.
     I envisage one big willow in the center of the stage. From its trunk a single branch extends
stage-right. And on that branch there’s a crow.”
     “Won’t the crow fly off?” says my master worriedly, as if talking to himself.
     “That’s no problem. One just ties the crow’s leg to the branch with a stoutish bit of string.
Now, underneath the branch there’s a wooden bathtub. And in the bathtub, sitting sideways,
there’s a beautiful woman washing herself with a cotton towel.”
     “That’s a bit decadent. Besides, who could you get to play the woman?” asks Waverhouse.
     “Again, no problem. Just hire a model from an art school.”
     “The Metropolitan Police Bureau will undoubtedly prove sticky.” My master’s worriment is
not allayed.
     “But it ought to be all right so long as one doesn’t present this work of art as some form of
show. If this were the sort of thing that the police get sticky about, it would be impossible ever
to draw from the nude.”
     “But nude models are provided for students to study, not just to stare at.”
     “If you scholars, the intellectual cream of Japan, remain so straight-laced in your ancient
bigotry, there’s no real hope for the future of Japan. What’s the distinction between painting and
drama? Are they not both arts?” Coldmoon, very evidently enjoying himself, lashes out at the
prudery of his listeners.
     “Well, let’s leave all that for the moment,” says Beauchamp, “but tell us how your play
proceeds.” He may not intend to use the play, but he clearly wants to know how that promising
opening scene will be developed.
      “Enter the haiku-poet Takahama Kyoshi. He advances along the ramp leading to the stage
carrying a walking stick and wearing a white pith-helmet. Under his silk-gauze surcoat, his white
kimono, patterned with colored splashes, is tucked up at the back, and he wears shoes in the
Western style. He is thus costumed to look like a contractor of Army supplies but, being a
haiku-poet, he must walk in a leisurely manner looking as though deeply absorbed in the
composition of a poem. When he reaches the main stage, he notices first the willow tree and
then the light-skinned lady in her bath. Startled, he looks up and sees the crow peering down at
her from its long branch. At this point the poet strikes a pose, which should be held for at least
fifty seconds, to indicate how deeply he is moved by the refined haiku-like effect of the scene
before him. Then in a deep resonant voice he declaims:



    “A crow
    Is in love
    With a woman in a bath”



      As soon as the last word has been spoken, the clappers are cracked and the curtain falls.
Well now, what do you think of it? Don’t you like it? I need hardly say that any sensible man
would rather play the part of a haiku-poet than that of a high-class tart.”
      Beauchamp, however, looks undecided and comments with a serious face, “It seems too
short. I think it needs a little more action, something that will add real human interest.”
      Waverhouse, who has so far been keeping comparatively quiet, can hardly be expected
indefinitely to pass up such a splendid opportunity for the display of his peculiar talents. “So that
wee bit of a thing is what you call a haiku-play? Quite awful! Ueda Bin is constantly pointing out
in his essays and articles that the spirit of haiku, as also indeed the comic spirit, lacks
constructive positivism. He argues that they undermine the morals and hence the morale of the
Japanese nation. And, as one would expect, whatever Bin points out is very much to the point.
He’d have you laughed out of town if you dared risk staging such an artsy-craftsy bit of rubbish.
In any case, it’s all so uncleancut that no one could tell whether it’s meant to be straight theater
or burlesque. A thing so indeterminate could, in fact, be anything. Forgive me that I take the
liberty of saying so, my dear Coldmoon, but I really do think you’d do better to stay in your
laboratory and limit your creativity to the grinding of glass balls. You could, I’m sure, write
hundreds of such plays but, since they could achieve nothing but the ruin of our nation, what
would be the point?”
      Coldmoon looks slightly huffed. “Do you think its effect is as demoralizing as all that?
Myself, I think it’s constructive, positivist, definitely yea-saying.” He is seeking to vindicate
something too unimportant to merit vindication. “The point is that Kyoshi actually makes the
crow fall in love with the woman. His lines having that effect are, I consider, an affirmation of
life, and that, I think, is very positivist.”
      “Now that,” says Waverhouse, “is a totally new approach. A novel concept casting fresh
light upon dramatic theory. We must listen with the deepest attention.”
      “As a bachelor of science, such an idea as that of a crow falling in love with a woman
strikes me as illogical.”
      “Quite so.”
      “But this illogicality is expressed with such consummate artistry that it does not seem in the
least illogical to the audience. The effect of great dramatic artistry is, in fact, to impose upon
the listener a willing suspension of disbelief.”
      “I doubt it,” says my master in tones of the deepest dubiety, but Coldmoon pays him no
heed.
      “You ask why the unreasonable should not sound unreasonable? Well, when I have given
the psychological explanation, you will understand why. Of course, the emotion of being in love,
or of not being in love can only be experienced by the poet. It has nothing whatsoever to do
with the crow. Similarly, the concept of a crow in love is not a concept likely to cross the mind
of a crow. In short, it is the poet himself who is in love with the woman. The moment Kyoshi
clapped eyes on her he must have fallen head over heels in love. He then sees the crow sitting
immobile on the branch and staring down at her. Being himself smitten with love for the lady, he
assumes that the crow is similarly moved. He is, of course, mistaken, but nevertheless, indeed
for that very reason, the basic idea of the play is not simply literary, but positivist as well. I
would in particular suggest that the manner in which the poet, while still contriving himself to
appear objective and heart-free, transposes his own sentiments to become crow-sentiments is
indisputably yea-saying and positivist. I ask you, gentlemen, am I not right?”
      “It’s a well-turned argument,” says Waverhouse, “but I bet it would leave Kyoshi, if he ever
heard it, distinctly taken aback. I accept that your exposition of the play is positivist but, if the
play were to be staged, the audience reaction would undoubtedly be negative. Don’t you agree,
Beauchamp?”
      “Yes, I confess I think it’s a little too negative.” Beauchamp confesses with due critical
gravity.
      My master seems to think things have gone far enough and, to ease the pressure upon his
favorite disciple, he seeks to lead the conversation away from Coldmoon’s ill-received venture
into the literary field. “But tell me, Beauchamp,” he says, “have you perhaps written any new
masterpieces recently?”
      “Nothing really worth showing you, but I am, in fact, thinking of publishing a collection of
them. Luckily, I chance to have the manuscript with me, and I’d welcome your opinion of these
trifles I’ve composed.” He thereupon produced from his breast a package wrapped in a cloth of
purple crepe. Loosening the material, he carefully extracted a notebook some fifty or sixty
pages thick which he proceeded to deposit, reverently, before my master. My master assumes
his most magisterial mien and then, with a grave “Allow me,” opens the book. There, on the first
page, stands an inscription:
Dedicated
                                         To the frail Opula

      My master stared at the page, wordless and with an enigmatic expression on his face, for
such a long time that Waverhouse peered across from beside him.
      “What have we here? New-style poetry? Aha! Already dedicated!
      How splendid of you, Beauchamp,” he says with all the enthusiasm of a hound on the scent,
“to come out bang with so bold a dedication. To, if my eyes do not deceive me, a certain
Opula?”
      My master, now looking more puzzled than enigmatic, turns to the poet. “My dear
Beauchamp,” he says, “this Opula, is she a real person?”
      “Oh yes indeed. She’s one of the young ladies whom I invited to our last Reading Party, the
one where Waverhouse so generously applauded me. She lives, in fact, in this neighborhood.
Actually, I called at her home on my way here but learnt, to my sorrow, that she’s been away
since last month. I gather that the whole family is spending the summer at Oiso.”
      Beauchamp looks peculiarly solemn as, with corroborative detail, he affirms the reality of
his dedication.
      “Come now, Sneaze, don’t go pulling a long face like that. This is the twentieth century and
you’d best get used to it. Let’s get down to considering the masterpiece. First of all,
Beauchamp, this dedication seems a bit of a bosh shot. What do you mean by ‘frail’?”
      “Well, I meant ‘frail’ in the romantic sense, to convey the idea of a person infinitely delicate,
infinitely refined and ethereal.”
      “Did you now. Well, the word can, of course, be so used but it does have other, coarser
connotations. Especially if it were read as an adjectival noun, you could be thought to be calling
her some sort of franion.
      So if I were you, I’d rephrase it.”
      “Could you suggest how? I’d like it to be unmisinterpretably poetic.”
      “Well, I think I’d say something like ‘Dedicated to all that’s frail beneath the nares of Opula.’
It wouldn’t involve much change in wording, but yet it makes an enormous difference in the
feeling.”
      “I see,” says Beauchamp. While it is quite clear that he doesn’t understand the balderdash
proposed by Waverhouse, he is trying hard to look as though he had grasped, considered, and
accepted it.
      My master, who has been sitting silently, turns the first page and begins to read aloud from
the opening section.



    “In the fragrance of that incense which I burn.
    When I am weary, seemingly
    Your soul trails in the smoky twist and turn
    Of love requited. Woe, ah woe is me,
    Who in a world as bitter as is this
    Must in a mist of useless yearning yearn
    For the sweet fire of your impassioned kiss.
     “This, I’m afraid,” he says with a sigh, “is a bit beyond me,” and he passes the notebook
along to Waverhouse.
     “The effect is strained, the imagery too heightened,” says Waverhouse passing it on to
Coldmoon.
     “I . . . s . . . e . . . e,” says Coldmoon, and returns it to the author.
     “It’s only natural that you should fail to understand it.” Beauchamp leaps to his own
defense. “In the last ten years the world of poetry has advanced and altered out of all
recognition. Modern poetry is not easy.
     You can’t understand it if you do no more than glance through it in bed or while you’re
waiting at a railway station. More often than not, modern poets are unable to answer even the
simplest questions about their own work. Such poets write by direct inspiration, and are not to
be held responsible for more than the writing. Annotation, critical commentary, and exegesis, all
these may be left to the scholars. We poets are not to be bothered with such trivia. Only the
other day some fellow with a name like Sōseki published a short story entitled ‘A Single Night.’
But it’s so vague that no one could make head or tail of it. I eventually got hold of the man and
questioned him very seriously about the real meaning of his story. He not only refused to give
any explanation, but even implied that, if the story happened in fact to have any meaning at all,
he couldn’t care less. His attitude was, I think, typical of a modern poet.”
     “He may be a poet, but he sounds, doesn’t he, downright odd,” observes my master.
     “He’s a fool.”Waverhouse demolishes this Sōseki in one curt breath.
     Beauchamp, however, has by no means finished defending the merits of his own daft
poem. “Nobody in our poetry group is in any way associated with this Sōseki fellow, and it
would be unreasonable if you gentlemen were to condemn my poems by reason of some such
imagined association. I took great pains with the construction of this work, and I would like in
particular to draw your attention to my telling contrast of this bitter world with the sweetness of
a kiss.”
     “The pains you must have taken,” says my master somewhat ambiguously, “have not gone
unremarked.”
     “Indeed,” says Waverhouse, “the skill with which you have made ‘bitter’ and ‘sweet’ reflect
each other is as interesting as if you had spiced each syllable of a haiku with seventeen
different peppery tastes. The saying speaks of only seven such peppery tangs but, so tasteful,
Beauchamp, is the concoction you’ve cooked up, that no saying is sufficient to say how
inimitable it is, and how totally lost I am in admiration of your art.”
     Rather unkindly, Waverhouse diverts himself at the expense of an honest man. Possibly for
that reason, my master suddenly got to his feet and went off into his study. Possibly not, for he
quickly re-emerged with a piece of paper in his hand.
     “Now that we’ve considered Coldmoon’s play and Beauchamp’s poem, perhaps you will
grant me the boon of your expert comments on this little thing here that I’ve written.” My master
looks as if he means what he says to be taken seriously. If so, he is to be immediately
disappointed.
     “If it’s that epitaph thing for Mr. the-late and-sainted Natural Man, I’ve heard it twice
already. If not thrice,” says Waverhouse dismissingly.
     “For heaven’s sake,Waverhouse, why don’t you just pipe down. Now, Beauchamp, I’d like
you to understand that this is not an example of my best and serious work. I wrote it just for
fun, so I’m not especially proud of it. But let’s just see if you like it.”
    “I’d be delighted to hear it.”
    “You too, Coldmoon. Since you’re here, you might as well listen.”
    “Of course, but it’s not long, is it?”
    “Very short. I doubt,” says my master quite untruthfully, “whether it contains as many as
three score words and ten,” whereupon, giving no opportunity for further interruptions, he
launches out upon a recital of his homespun master-work.



    “‘The Spirit of Japan,’ cries Japanese man;
    ‘Long may it live,’ cries he
    But his cry breaks off in that kind of cough
    Which comes from the soul’s T.B.”



    “What a magnificient opening,” burbles Coldmoon with real enthusiasm. “The theme rises
before one, immediate, undodgeable, and imposing, like a mountain!”



    “‘The Spirit of Japan,’ scream the papers,
    Pickpockets scream it too:
    In one great jump the Japanese Spirit
    Crosses the ocean blue
    And is lectured upon in England,
    While a play on this staggering theme
    Is a huge success on the German stage.
    A huge success? A scream!”



     “Splendid,” says Waverhouse, letting his head fall backwards in token of his approbation.
“It’s even better than that epiphanic epitaph.”



    “Admiral Tōgō has the Japanese Spirit,
    So has the man in the street:
    Fish shop managers, swindlers, murderers,
    None would be complete,
    None would be the men they are,
None would be a man
If he wasn’t wrapped up like a tuppenny cup
In the Spirit of Japan”



“Please,” breathes Coldmoon, “please do mention that Coldmoon has it too.”

“But if you ask what this Spirit is
They give that cough and say
‘The Spirit of Japan is the Japanese Spirit,’
    Then they walk away
    And when they’ve walked ten yards or so
    They clear their throats of phlegm,
    And that clearing sound is the Japanese Spirit Manifest in them.”



    “Oh I like that,” says Waverhouse, “that’s a very well-turned phrase. Sneaze, you’ve got
talent, real literary talent. And the next stanza?”



    “Is the Spirit of Japan triangular?
    Is it, do you think, a square?
    Why no indeed! As the words themselves
    Explicitly declare,
    It’s an airy, fairy, spiritual thing
    And things that close to God
    Can’t be defined in a formula
    Or measured with a measuring-rod.”



    “It’s certainly an interesting composition and most unusual in that, defying tradition, it has a
strong didactic element. But don’t you think it contains too many Spirits of Japan. One can
have,” says Beauchamp mildly, “too much of the best of things.”
    “A good point. I agree.”Waverhouse chips in yet again with two-pen-nyworth of tar.

    “There’s not one man in the whole of Japan
    Who has not used the phrase,
    But I have not met one user yet
    Who knows what it conveys.
    The Spirit of Japan, the Japanese Spirit,
    Could it conceivably be
    Nothing but another of those long-nosed goblins Only the mad can see?”



     My master comes to the end of his poem and, believing it pregnant with eminently
debatable material, sits back in expectation of an ava-lanche of comment. However, though the
piece is undoubtedly that masterpiece for which the anthologists have been waiting, its endless
Western form and its lack of clear meaning have resulted in the present audience not realizing
that the recitation is over. They, accordingly, just sit there. For a long time. Eventually, no more
verses being vouchsafed them, Coldmoon ventures “Is that all?”
     My master answers with a noncommittal, I thought falsely carefree, kind of throaty grunt.
     Very much contrary to my own expectations, Waverhouse failed to rise to the occasion with
one of his usual flights of fantastication.
     Instead, after a brief interval, he turned to my master and said, “How about collecting some
of your shorter pieces into a book? Then you, too, could dedicate it to someone.”
     “How about to you?” my master flippantly suggests.
     “Not on your life,” says Waverhouse very firmly. He takes out the scissors which he had
earlier analyzed for the benefit of Mrs. Sneaze and begins clipping away at his fingernails.
     Coldmoon turns to Beauchamp and, somewhat cautiously, enquires,
     “Are you closely acquainted with Miss Opula Goldfield?”
     “After I invited her to our Reading Party last spring, we became friends and we now see
quite a lot of each other. Whenever I’m with her I feel, as it were, inspired, and even after
we’ve parted, I still feel, at least for quite a time, such a flame alight within me that poems, both
in the traditional forms and in the modern style, come singing up like steam from a kettle. I
believe that this little collection contains so high a proportion of love poems precisely because I
am so deeply stirred by women and, in particular, by her. The only way I know by which to
express my sincere gratitude is by dedicating this book to the source of its inspiration. I stand
at the end of a long tradition inasmuch as, since time immemorial, no poet wrote fine poetry
save under the inspiration of some deeply cherished woman.”
     “Is that indeed so?” says Coldmoon as though he had just learnt a fact of imponderable
gravity. But deep behind the sober skin of his face I could see him laughing at the folly of his
friend.
     Even this gathering of gasbags cannot wheeze on forever, and the pressure of their
conversation is now fast whimpering down toward exhaustion. Being under no obligation to
listen all day long to their endless blather, their carping and flapdoodle, I excused myself and
went out into the garden in search of a praying mantis.
     The sun is going down. Its reddened light, filtered through the green foliage of a sultan’s
parasol, flecks the ground in patches. High up on the trunk of the tree, cicadas are singing their
hearts out. Tonight, perhaps, a little rain may fall.
                                                 IV




IHAVE,of late,taken to taking exercise. To those who may sneer at me saying, “What sauce, a
 mere cat taking exercise indeed!” I would like to address you with the few following words. It
was not until recently that human beings, previously content to regard eating and sleeping as
their only purposes in life, began to grasp the point of taking exercise. Let all mankind
remember in what self-complacent idleness they used to pass their days; how passionately
they once believed that impassivity of mind and body were the signs of a noble soul, and that
the honor of a nobleman resided in his ability to do nothing more strenuous than to plant his
bum on a cushion that there it might, in comfort, rot away. It is only recently that, like some
infectious disease brought from the West to this pure land of the gods, a stream of silly
injunctions has been sprayed upon us to take exercise, to gulp milk, to shower ourselves with
freezing water, to plonk ourselves in the sea, and, in the summertime, to sequester ourselves in
the mountains on a diet, allegedly healthy, of nothing more solid than mist. Such importations
seem to me about as salubrious as the black plague, tuberculosis, and that very Western
malady, neurasthenia. However, since I am only one year old, born as I was last year, I cannot
personally testify as to the state of affairs when human beings here first began to suffer from
these sicknesses. It happened at a time before I came to float along in this vale of tears.
Nevertheless, one may fairly equate a cat’s one year, with ten for human beings: and though
our span of life is two or three times shorter than theirs, a cat may still therein achieve full feline
self-development. It follows that any evaluation of a cat’s life and a man’s life by reference to a
common time-scale must result in grievous error.
      That point is surely proven by the fact that I, who am but a year and a few months old,
possess the discernment to make such an analysis. In contrast, the third daughter of my
master, whom I understand to be already in her third year, is lamentably backward, a laggard in
all learning, a slow-coach in development. Her accomplishments are limited.
      She yowls, she mucks her bed and she sucks milk from her mother.
      Compared with someone like myself who am distressed by the state of the world and
deplore the degeneracy of the age, that girl is truly infantile. It is consequently not in the least
surprising that I should have stored away, deep within my mind, the entire history of taking
exercise, of sea-bathing, and of going away for a change of air. If there should be anyone
surprised at a thing so trifling as this vast extent of my knowledge, it could only be another of
those handicapped humans, those stumbling creatures whom heaven has retarded with the gift
of no more than a measly couple of legs. From time immemorial man has been a slow-coach,
so it is only very recently that such inveterate sluggards have begun to recommend the virtues
of exercise, and, as if the notion were their own incredible discovery, to babble endlessly of the
benefits of bobbing about in the sea. Per contra, I was aware of such things in my pre-natal
condition, and to fully realize the benisons of brine one needs but walk on a beach.
      Precisely how many fish are frolicking about in so vast a volume of water, I would not care
to guess; however it is certain that not a single specimen has ever fallen so sick as to need the
attentions of a doctor.
     There they all are, swimming about in the best of health. When a fish does catch some
illness, its body first becomes helpless. But let it be remembered that the death of a fish is
described in Japanese as an ascen-sion. Birds, we say, drop dead, become mere fallen things.
Men are simply said to have kicked the bucket. But fish, I stress, ascend. Now, just ask anyone
who’s journeyed overseas, anyone who’s crossed the Indian Ocean, whether they’ve seen a
dying fish. Of course they haven’t. And no wonder. However often you might plow back and
forth across that endless waste of water, never would you see afloat upon its waves one single
fish that had just given up its last breath. Given up, I should perhaps fish-pertinently say, its last
seawater gulp. Had you assiduously searched since time began, were you now to go on
steaming day and night up and down that wide and boundless expanse of water, not one
solitary fish would ever be seen to ascend. Since fish do not ascend, their undying strength,
their hardihood, indeed their deathlessness, is easily deduced.
     How comes it, then, that fish should be so death defyingly hardy?
     Here once again, mankind can give no answer. But the answer, as I shortly shall disclose,
is simplicity itself. The answer is that fish are hardy because they incessantly bathe in the sea,
because they swill saltwater.
     It’s as simple as that. Now, since the benefits of sea bathing are so evidenced by fish,
surely it must follow that the practice would be beneficial to mankind. Lo and behold, in 1750 a
certain Dr. Richard Russell came out with the humanly exaggerated pronouncement that anyone
who jumped into the sea at Brighton would find that all his various diseases would be cured on
the spot. Is it not laughable that it took mankind so long to arrive at so simple a conclusion?
Even we cats, when the time is ripe, intend to go down to the seaside, to some place like
Kaniakura. But now is not the time. There is always a right time for everything. Just as the
Japanese people before the Restoration of the Emperor, both lived and died without benefit of
sea bathing, so cats today have not yet reached the appropriate stage for leaping naked into
the briny deep. Timing is all important, and a hurried job is a job half-botched. Consequently,
since no cat taken today to be drowned in some shrine’s canal will ever come home safely, it
would be most imprudent indeed for me to go plunging in. Until by the laws of evolution we cats
have developed the characteristics needed to resist the rage of overwhelming waves; until, in
fact, a dead cat can be said not to have died but, like fish, to have ascended, until that happy
day, I won’t go near the water.
     Postponing my sea bathing to some later date, I have anyway decided to make a start on
some sort of exercise. In this enlightened twentieth century, any failure to take exercise is likely
to be interpreted as a sign of pauperdom. Which would be bad for one’s reputation. If you don’t
take exercise, you will be judged incapable of taking it by reason of an inability to afford either
the time or the expense, or both. It is thus no longer a simple question of not taking exercise. In
olden times those who did take physical exercise, persons such as the riffraff of male servants
in an upper-class household, were regarded with a proper scorn.
     But nowadays it is precisely those who do not take some form of physical exercise at
whom the world turns up its nose. The world’s evalua-tions of an individual’s social worth, like
the slits in my eyeballs, change with time and circumstance. In point of fact my pupil-slits vary
but modestly between broad and narrow, but mankind’s value judgements turn somersaults and
cartwheels for no conceivable reason. Still, now that I come to think of it, there may perhaps be
sense in such peculiar topsy-turvydom. For just as there are two ends to every string, there are
two sides to every question. Perhaps in its extreme adaptability mankind has found a way to
make apparent opposites come out with identical meanings. Thus, if one takes the symbols
meaning “idea” and turns them upside-down, one finds oneself with the symbols meaning “plan.”
     Charming, isn’t it? A similar conception can be seen at work in the Japanese practice of
viewing the so-called Bridge of Heaven by bending down and peering backward between one’s
parted legs. Seen thus, the sea and its reflection of the pine-trees on the sandbar appear like
true pines reared into the sky, whereas the true pines and the sky appear as trees reflected
upon the water. It is indeed a remarkable effect. Even the works of Shakespeare might be
more thoroughly appreciated if they were re-examined from unorthodox positions. Someone,
once in a while, should take a good long look at Hamlet through his legs.
     Presented upside-down, that tragedy might earn the bald remark “Ye Gods, this play is
bad.” How else, except by standing on their heads, can the critics in our literary world make
any progress?
     Considered against that background, it is hardly surprising that those who once spoke ill of
physical exercise should suddenly go crazy about sports, that even women should walk about
on the streets with tennis rackets clutched in their hands. So far as I’m concerned, I have no
criticisms to offer on any of these matters provided no misguided human being has the
effrontery to criticize a cat for the sauciness of its interest in taking physical exercise. That said,
perhaps I ought to satisfy your probable curiosity, to offer some explanation of the exercise I
take.
     As you are aware, it is my misfortune that my paws cannot grasp any kind of implement. I
am consequently unable to pick up balls or to grip such things as bats and bloody rackets.
Moreover, even could I handle them, I cannot buy them for I don’t have any money. For these
two reasons, I have chosen such kinds of exercise as cost nothing and need no special
equipment. I suppose you might consequently assume that my idea of exercise must be limited
to merely walking about, or to running away like Rickshaw Blacky with a slice of stolen tuna fish
jammed in my jaws. But to swagger about on the ground by the mere mechanical movement of
four legs and in strict obedience to the laws of gravity, that is all too simple; simple and
therefore totally uninteresting. There is indeed one kind of exercise called “movements” in which
my master occasionally indulges. But it is, in fact, no more than its name suggests, a matter of
mere mechanical movements. Which, to my mind, is a des-ecration of the sanctity of exercise.
Of course, if some true incentive is involved, I do not always scorn the simplicities of mere
movement. For example, I get real pleasure from racing for dried bonito and from going on
salmon hunts. But those activities are related to specific objectives. If the incentives are
removed, the activities become mere waste of spirit, ashes in the mouth.
     When there is no prize to provide the needed stimulus, then my preference is for exercises
that demand some kind of genuine skill. I have devised a variety of exercises satisfying that
requirement. One is jumping from the kitchen-eaves up and onto the main roof of the house.
     Another is standing with all four legs together on the plum-blossom shape of the narrow tile
at the very top of the roof. An especially difficult feat is walking along the laundry pole, which
usually proves a failure because my claws can’t penetrate the hard and slippery surface of
bamboo. Perhaps my most interesting exercise is jumping suddenly from behind onto the
children’s backs. However, unless I am extremely careful about the method and timing of such
exploits, the penalties involved can be uncommonly painful. Indeed, I derive so very little
pleasure from having my head stuffed deep in a paperbag that I only risk this splendid exercise
three times, at most, in a month. One must also recognize the disadvantage that any success in
this form of exercise depends entirely, and unsatisfactorily, upon the availability of some human
partner. Yet another form of exercise is clawing the covers of books. In this case two kinds of
snags arise. First, there is the invariable drubbing administered by my master whenever he
catches me at it.
      Secondly, though the exercise undoubtedly develops a certain dexterity of finger, it does
nothing at all for the remaining muscles of my body.
      I have so far only described those comparatively crude activities which I would choose to
call old-fashioned exercises. However, my newfangled sports include a few of the most
exquisite refinement. First among such sports comes hunting the praying mantis, which is only
less noble than hunting rats by the lesser degree of its dangers. The open season, with the
quarry in superb condition, runs from high mid-summer until early in the autumn. The hunting
rules are as follows. First one goes to the garden to flush one’s quarry out. Given the proper
weather, one may expect to find at least a brace of them browsing in the open.
      Next, having chosen one particular mantis, a sudden dash, a regular windslicer, is made
towards the quarry. The mantis, thus alerted to its danger, rears its head and readies for the
fray. For all its puniness, the mantis, at least until it realizes the hopelessness of any further
resistance, is a plucky little beast, and its fatuous readiness to make a fight of it adds zest to
the fun. I, accordingly, open by patting him lightly on the head with the flat of my right, front
paw. The head is soft and is generally cocked to one side. At this point, the expression on the
quarry’s face adds singular edge to my pleasure. The beast is clearly puzzled. I immediately
spring around behind him and, from that new position, lightly claw at his wings. These wings are
normally folded carefully close but, if clawed with exactly the right degree of scratchiness, they
can be har-rowed loose, and from beneath the beast a disheveled flurry of underwear, a
yellowish tatter of stuff like thin transparent paper, droops flimsy into view. Oh, what an elegant
fellow! Tricked out in double lined clothing even at the height of summer! And may it bring him
luck!
      Invariably, at this moment the mantis twists his long, green neck around to face me. Then,
turning his whole body in the same direction, sometimes he defiantly advances and sometimes
simply stands there like some dwarf-annoyed giraffe. If he remains transfixed in that latter
attitude I shall be cheated of my exercise. Accordingly, having given him every chance to take
the initiative, I then give him a stimulating smack.
      If the mantis happens to have the least intelligence, he will now attempt escape, but some,
ill-schooled and of a barbarous ferocity, will persevere in derring-do, even to the point of
launching an attack. When dealing with such savages, I carefully calculate the precisely proper
moment to strike back and then, suddenly, deliver a really heavy blow as he advances at me. I
would say that on such occasions the beast is usually batted sideways for a distance of
between two and three feet. However, if my quarry displays a civilized recognition of its plight
and drags away in pitiful retreat, then I am moved to pity. Off I go, racing along like a flying
bird, two or three times around a convenient tree in the garden.
      Yet, when I return I rarely find that the mantis has managed to crawl away more than five
or six inches. Now conscious of my power, he has no stomach for continued battle. He staggers
away, tottering first left and then right in dazed attempts to escape me. Matching his
movements, this way and that, I harry him back and forth. Sometimes in his ultimate despair, he
makes the ultimate effort of fluttering his wings. It is the nature of the wings, as of the neck, of
a praying mantis to be exceedingly long and exceedingly slender. Indeed, I understand that
these wings are entirely ornamental and are of no more practical use to a praying mantis than
are, to a human being, the English, French, and German languages. It follows that, however
ultimate his effort, however grand his pitiful remonstrance, no fluttering of those ineffectual
wings can have on me the very least effect. One speaks of his effort but, in reality, there’s
nothing so purposeful about it. One should not use a word so energetic to describe the
shambling totter, torn wings a-drag along the ground, of this pathetic creature. For I confess
that I really do feel a wee mite sorry for my miserable antagonist. However, my need for
physical exercise outweighs all other considerations, and into every life, even that of a mantis, a
little rain must fall. My conscience salved, I dart beyond him from behind, twist, and so confront
him. In his condition, having committed himself to forward movement, he has no choice but to
keep coming. Equally and naturally, faced with such aggression, I have no choice but to give
him a whack on the nose. My foe collapses, falls down flat with his wings spread out on either
side. Extending a front paw, I hold him down in that squashed-face position whilst I take a little
breather. Myself at ease again, I let the wretched perisher get up and struggle on. Then, again,
I catch him. My strategy is based, of course, on the classic Chinese methods of Kung Ming,
that military marvel of the Shu Kingdom in the third century, who, seven times in succession,
first caught, then freed, his enemy. For maybe thirty minutes I pursue that classic alternation.
Eventually, the mantis abandons hope and, even when free to drag himself away, lies there
motionless. I lift him lightly in my mouth and spit him out again. Since, even then, he just lies
loafing on the ground, I prod him with my paw. Under that stimulus the mantis hauls himself
erect and makes a kind of clumsy leap for freedom. So once again, down comes my quick
immobilizing paw. In the end, bored by the repetitions, I conclude my exercise by eating him.
      Incidentally, for the benefit of those who’ve never munched mantis, I would report that the
taste is rather unpleasant and I have been led to understand that the nutrimental value is
negligible.
      Next to mantis hunting, my favorite sport is cricketing. In exactly the same way as, among
the varieties of man, one can find oily creatures, cheeky chaps, and chatterboxes, so among
the species of cicada there are oily cicadas, pert cicadas, and chatterboxes, too. The oily ones
are not much fun, being in fact too greasily importunate. The cheeky chaps annoy one, being a
sight too uppity. And I am consequently most interested in silencing the chatterboxes. They do
not appear until the end of summer. There comes a day when, unexpectedly, the first cool wind
of autumn blows through the gaps torn in the sleeves of one’s kimono, making one feel a
sniffling cold is surely on its way. Just about then the chatterboxes, tails cocked up behind
them, start their singing din. And a deal of din they make. So much noise, in fact, one could
almost believe they have no purposes in life except to chatter at the top of their rowdy voices
and to be caught by cats. It is in early autumn that I catch them, and cricketing is what I call this
form of taking exercise. I must first emphasize that in hunting for live chatterboxes there’s no
point in quest-ing on the ground. Any that are on the ground will invariably be found half-buried
under ants. Those which I stalk are not the perished relics at the mercy of the pismires, but
those alive and chattering away in the branches of tall trees. Whilst I am on this general
subject, it occurs to me to query whether these noisy creatures are shouting o-shi-i-tsuku-tsuku
or tsuku-tsuku-o-shi-i. I suspect there could be real significance in the difference, a difference
no doubt capable of casting much-needed light on the whole field of cicada studies. It is a topic
that cries out for the exercise of the particular gifts of humankind. Indeed, man’s natural
proclivity for this kind of investigation is the sole characteristic by which he is superior to a cat.
Which is, of course, precisely the reason that human beings, proud of their singularity, attach so
much importance to such pettifogging points. Consequently, if men can’t offer an immediate
answer, I suggest that for all our sakes they think the matter over very carefully. Of course, so
far as my cricketing is concerned, the outcome of their ponderings, whatever that may be,
could hardly matter less.
      Now, with respect to the practice of cricketing, all I have to do is to climb toward the
source of noise and catch the so-called singer while he is totally absorbed in his so-called act
of singing. Superficially the simplest of all exercises, it is in fact quite difficult. Since I have four
legs, I do not regard myself as inferior to any other animal in the matter of moving about on the
surface of this planet. Indeed, by mathematical deduction of comparative mobility by reference
to the number of legs involved, the average cat would seem to be at least twice as nimble as
the average man. But when it comes to climbing trees, there are many animals more dexterous
than the cat. Apart from monkeys, those absolute professionals, one is bound to concede that
men, descended as they are from tree-conditioned apes, sometimes display a truly formidable
skill at climbing trees. I hasten to add that, since climbing trees is unnatural, being a direct
defiance of the laws of gravity, I cannot consider a failure to shine in such unreasonable activity
as in any way shameful. But it is a disadvantage to a cricketer. Luckily, I happen to possess
this useful set of claws which makes it possible for me, however clumsily, to get up trees, but
it’s not as easy as you might think. What’s more, a chatterbox, unlike the pitiable mantis, really
can fly. And once it takes to the wing, all my painful climbing profits me nothing. Indeed a dismal
outcome. It has, moreover, the dangerous and ugly habit of pissing in one’s eye. One can’t
complain of its taking flight, but such filthy micturition is hardly playing the game. What
psychological pressure induces this incontinence at the moment immediately prior to an act of
aviation? Is it, perhaps, that the thought of flying is too unbearable to bear? Or is it simply that
a pissed-on prowler is so shockedly surprised that his intended prey gains ample time to
escape? If that latter hypothesis is correct, this urinating insect falls into a common category
with the ink-ejecting squid, with the tattoo-flashing brawler in the alleyways of Tokyo, and with
my poor old idiot master spouting clouds of protective Latin. Again, I would stress that this
question of urination at take-off is no mere piddling matter, but an issue of possibly fundamental
relevance to the study of cicadas. The problem certainly merits the detailed study of a doctoral
dissertation.
      But I digress too far. Let us return to the practicalities of cricketing.
      The spot where the cicadas most thickly concentrate (if you object to my use in this context
of the word “concentrate,” then I was originally prepared to substitute the word “assemble,” but
I find that latter word so banal that I have decided to stick to “concentrate”) is the green
paulownia, the so-called Sultan’s Parasol which, I am reliably informed, is known to the Chinese
as the Chinese Parasol. Now, the green paulownia is densely foliaged and each of its leaves is
as big as a big, round fan.
      It is consequently hard to see the branches where my quarry lurks; a fact which constitutes
another hazard for the keen cricketer. I sometimes think that it was with my predicament in
mind that the author of that popular song wrote those words of yearning for “one, though heard,
invisible.” In any event, the best I can do is to work my way toward that place from which the
song appears to emanate.
      About six feet up from the ground, the trunks of all green paulownias fork conveniently into
two. Within that crotch I rest from the exer-tion of my initial climb and, peering upward between
the backs of the leaves, try to see where the chatterboxes are. Sometimes, however, before I
even get to the crotch, one or two of my potential victims grow alarmed and, with a curious
rustling sound, impatiently take flight. Then I’ve really had it. For, judging them by their
readiness to be led, and their mindless passion for conformity of conduct, these chatterboxes
are no less imbecile than men. As soon as the first one flies away, all the others follow. There
are occasions, therefore, when by the time I’ve reached the fork, the whole tree stands
deserted in a dead dispiriting silence. On one such day I’d climbed up to the fork only to find,
however hard I peered and however much I pricked my ears, no faintest sign or sound of a
chatterbox. Deciding it would be too much of a bore to start all over again in some other tree, I
concluded that the sensible thing would be to stay where I was, enjoy the relaxation and wait
for a second chance when the refugees returned. Before long I grew sleepy, and soon was
happily far away in the pleasant land of Nod. My awakening was unpleasant, for I’d fallen
thuddingly down onto a flagstone in the garden.
     Nevertheless, I usually manage to catch one chatterbox for every tree I climb. It is, alas, an
unavoidable characteristic of this sport, one which sadly reduces my interest in it, that, so long
as I’m up in the tree, I have to hold my captive in my mouth; for, by the time I’ve descended and
can spit him out on the ground, he is usually dead. However hard I may thereafter play with him
and scratch him, he offers no response. The most exquisite moment in cricketing occurs when,
after sneaking quietly upon a chatterbox whose whole vibrating being is concentrated upon
song, upon the soul-absorbing business of scraping his tail parts in and out of the main shell of
his body, suddenly I pounce and my paws clamp down upon him. How piercingly he shrieks,
with what a threshing ecstasy of terror he shakes his thin transparent wings in efforts to
escape. The sheer speed and intensity of these happenings creates an aesthetic experience
impossible to describe. One can only say that the magnificence of its death-throes is the
supreme achievement of a cicada’s life. Every time I catch a chatterbox I ask, in suitably
pressing terms, for a demonstration of his thrilling artistry.
     When tired of his performance, I beg his pardon for the interruption and pop him into my
mouth. Occasional virtuosi have been known to continue with their act even after my mouth has
closed behind them.
     After cricketing, my next most favored form of physical exercise is pine sliding. A detailed
explanation would be too much, so I’ll offer only the minimum of comment needed for an
understanding of this sport. Its name suggests that it is sliding down pine trees, but, in fact, it
doesn’t.
     It is, indeed, another form of climbing trees. But whereas when cricketing I climb to catch a
chatterbox, when pine sliding I climb purely for the climbing. Ever since Genzaemon warmed
the room for laypriest Saimyoji, that one-time Regent at Kamakura, by burning those trees to
which Genzaemon in his own happier days had been particularly attached, the pine tree has
been not only, as the song about that incident assures us, naturally an evergreen, but also most
unnaturally rough-barked to one’s touch. Whatever the explanation, there is certainly no tree
less slippery than the pine, and no trunk in the world affords a better climbing surface either for
hands or for feet. Clearly, when it comes to claws, nothing is more clawable and I can
consequently run up a pine trunk in one breath.
     Having run up, I run down. Now there are two styles of downward running. One way is to
descend, effectively upside-down, with one’s head facing the ground; the other is to descend
tail-first in the normal attitude for an ascending climb. And which, I would ask you know-it-all
human beings, would you suppose is the more difficult style of the two?
      Being but shallow brained, you probably think that one would find it easier to position one’s
head so as to lead in the direction of desired movement; you’d be wrong. When you heard me
speak of running downward, no doubt you thought immediately of Yoshitsune’s headlong horse
charge down the cliff at Hiyodori-goe. And I can imagine you thinking to yourself that anything
good enough for a human hero like Yoshitsune must be more than sufficient for some unnamed,
unknown cat. But such disdain would be entirely misplaced. Just to begin with, do you know
how cats’ claws grow, their directional positioning in accordance with their function? They are,
in fact, retrorsely curved so that, like firemen’s hooks, they are peculiarly suited to catching hold
of things and drawing them chestward. They are virtually useless for pushing things away. Now,
since I am a terrestrial creature, it would be a breach of natural law if, having dashed up a pine
tree trunk, I were to remain indefinitely and unsupported at the swaying top of the tree. I would
certainly fall down. And, if that fall were nowise checked, the rate of my descent could well
prove lethal. Thus, when I take measures to mitigate the potentially disastrous effects of the
laws of gravity and nature, I call the consequent process of descent “descending.”Though there
may seem to be a substantial difference between descending and free falling, it isn’t as great
as one might fondly imagine; indeed, no more than a single letter’s worth. Since I do not care to
free all out of a pine tree top, I must find some means to check the natural acceleration of my
body. And that’s where my claws come in; or rather, out. Being retrorsely curved, all my twenty
claws, appropriately extended from my heaven-facing body, provide a gripping power and
frictional resistance sufficient to transform the hazards of free fall into the relative safety of
descent.
      Simple, isn’t it? But you just try to come down from a pine tree like a wolf on the fold in the
headlong Yoshitsune style, and that’s not simple at all. Claws are useless. Nothing retards the
slithering acceleration of your body’s weight, and those who’d hoped thus safely to descend,
finish up by plummeting earthward like boulders dropped by rocs. You will, accordingly,
appreciate that the headlong descent of Hiyodori-goe was an exceptionally difficult feat, one
which only a veritable hero could successfully accomplish. Among cats, probably only I, the
Yoshitsune of my kind, can pull it off. I accordingly feel I have earned my right to give a name to
this particular sport, and I have chosen “pine sliding.”
      I cannot conclude these few words on the subject of sport without at least some mention of
“going around the fence.” My master’s garden, rectangular in shape, is on all sides separated
from neighboring properties by a bamboo fence about three feet high. The section running
parallel to the veranda is some fifty feet long, and the two side-sections are each about half
that length. The object of the aforementioned sport is to walk right around the whole property
without falling off the thin top edge of the fence. There are times, I confess, when I do topple
off, but, when successful, I find such tours of the horizon eminently gratifying.
      Really, great fun. The fence is supported here and there, and particularly at the corners, by
sturdy cedar stakes, fire hardened at each end, on the tops of which I can conveniently take
breathers in the course of my circumambulation. I found myself today in really rather good
form.
      Before lunch I managed three successful tours, and on each occasion my performance
improved. Naturally, every improvement adds to the fun.
      I was just about halfway home on my fourth time around when three crows, gliding down
from the next-door roof, settled on the fence-top, side-by- side, some six short feet ahead of
me. Cheeky bastards! Quite apart from the fact that they’re interrupting my exercise, such low-
born, ill-bred, rain-guttersnipes have no right whatsoever to come trespassing, indeed
seemingly to start squatting, on my fence-property. So I told them, in terms of hissing clarity, to
get lost. The nearest crow, turning its head toward me, appears to be grinning like a half-wit.
The next one unconcernedly studies my master’s garden. And the third continues wiping his
filthy beak on a projecting splinter of the fence bamboo. He had all too evidently just finished
eating something rather nasty. I stood there balanced on the fence, giving them a civilized three
minutes grace to shove off. I’ve heard that these birds are commonly called Crowmagnons, and
they certainly look as daft and primitively barbarous as their uncouth nickname would suggest.
Despite my courteous waiting, they neither greeted me nor flew away. Becoming at last
inpatient, I began slowly to advance; whereupon the nearest Crowmagnon tentatively stirred his
wings. I thought he was at last backing off in face of my power, but all he did was to shift his
posture so as to present his arse, rather than his head, toward me. Outright insolence! Conduct
unbecoming even a Crowmagnon. Were we on the ground, I would call him to immediate
account, but, alas, being as I am engaged upon a passage both strenuous and perilous, I really
can’t be bothered to be diverted from my purpose by such aboriginal naiseries. On the other
hand, I do not greatly care for the idea of being stuck here while a trey of brainless birds waits
for whatever impulse will lift them into the air. For one thing, there’s my poor tired feet. Those
feathered lightweights are used to standing around in such precarious places so that, if my
fence-top happens to please them, they might perch here forever. I, on the other hand, am
already exhausted. This is my fourth time around today, and this particular exercise is anyway
no less tricky than tightrope-walking.
      At the best of times, each teetering step I take could throw me clean off-balance, which
makes it all the more unpardonable that these three blackamoors should loaf here blocking the
way. If it comes to the worst, I shall just have to abandon today’s exercises and hop down from
the fence. It’s a bore, of course, but perhaps I might as well hop down now.
      After all, I am heavily outnumbered by the enemy. Besides, the poor simple things do seem
to be strangers in these parts. Their beaks, I notice, are almost affectedly pointed, the sort of
savage, stabbing snout that, found amongst his sons, would make its foul possessor the most
sharply favored member of a long-nosed goblin’s brood. The signs are unmistakable that these
Crowmagnon louts will be equally ill-natured.
      If I start a fight and then, by sheer mischance, happen to lose my foot-ing, the loss of face
will be much greater than if I just chose to disengage. Consequently, thinking that it might be
prudent to avoid a showdown, I had just decided to hop down when the arse-presenting savage
offered me a rudery. “Arseholes,” he observed. His immediate neighbor repeated this coarse
remark, while the last one of the trio took the trouble to say it twice. I simply could not overlook
behavior so offensive.
      First and foremost, to allow myself to be grossly insulted in my own garden by these mere
crows would reflect adversely upon my good name.
      Should you object that I do not have a name to be reflected upon, I will amend that
sentence to refer to reflections upon my honor. When my honor is involved, cost what it may, I
cannot retreat. At this point it occurred to me that a disorderly rabble is often described as a
“flock of crows;” so it is just possible that, though they outnumber me three to one, when it
comes to the crunch they’ll prove more weak than they look. Thus comforted, thus grimly
resolute, I began slowly to advance.
     The crows, oblivious to my action, seem to be talking among themselves. They are
exasperating! If only the fence were wider by five or six inches, I’d really give them hell. But as
things are, however vehemently vexed I may feel, I can only tiptoe slowly forward to avenge my
injured honor. Eventually, I reached a point a bare half-foot away from the nearest bird and was
urging myself onward to one last final effort when, all together and as though by
prearrangement, the three brutes suddenly flapped their wings and lumbered up to hang a
couple of feet above me in the air. The down-draught gusted into my face. Unsportingly
surprised, I lost my balance and fell off sideways into the garden.
     Kicking myself for permitting such a shameful mishap to occur, I looked up from the ground
to find all three marauders safely landed back again where they had perched before. Their
three sharp beaks in parallel alignment, they peer down superciliously into my angry eyes.
     The bloody nerve of them! I responded with a glowering scowl. Which left them quite
unmoved. So next I snarled and arched my back. Equally ineffective. Just as the subtlety of
symbolic poetry is lost on a material-ist, so were the symbols of my anger quite meaningless to
the crows.
     Which, now that I reflect upon the matter, is perfectly understandable.
     Hitherto, and wrongly, I have been seeking to cope with crows as if they had been cats.
Had that been the case, they would by now, most certainly, have reacted. But crows are
crows, and what but crow behavior can anyone expect of them? My efforts have, in fact, all
been as pointless as the increasingly short-tempered arguments of a businessman trying to
budge my master; as pointless as Yoritomo’s gift of a solid silver cat to the unworldly Saigyo;
as pointless as the bird shit that these fools and their fool cousins fly over to Ueno to deposit on
the statue of poor Sai-o Takamori. Once I have conceived a thought, I waste no time before I
act upon it. It were better to give up than to persist in a dialogue with dunces, so I abandoned
my endeavors and withdrew to the veranda.
     It was time for dinner anyway.
     Exercise has merits, but one mustn’t overdo it. My whole body felt limp and almost slovenly.
What’s more I feel horribly hot. We are now at the beginning of autumn, and during my exercise
my fur seems to have become saturated with afternoon sunshine. The sweat which oozes from
the pores in my skin refuses to drop away, but clings in greasy clots around the roots of every
separate hair. My back itches. One can clearly distinguish between itches caused by
perspiration and itches caused by creeping fleas. If the site of the itch lies within reach of my
mouth, I can bite the cause, and if within reach of my feet, I know precisely how to scratch it.
But if the irritation is at the midpoint of my spine, I simply can’t get at it. In such a case, one
must either frot oneself on the first available human being or scrape one’s back against a pine
tree’s bark.
     Since men are both vain and stupid, I approach them in a suitably ingratiating manner using,
as they would say, “tones that would wheedle a cat.” Such are the tones men sometimes use
to me, but, seen from my position, the phrase should be “tones by which a cat may be
wheedled.”
     Not that it matters. Anyway, human beings being the nitwits that they are, a purring
approach to any of them, either male or female, is usually interpreted as proof that I love them,
and they consequently let me do as I like, and on occasions, poor dumb creatures, they even
stroke my head. Of late, however, just because some kind of parasitic insect, fleas, in fact,
have taken to breeding in my fur, even my most tentative approaches to a human being evoke a
gross response. I am grabbed by the scruff of the neck and pitched clean out of the room. It
seems that this sudden aversion stems from human disgust with those barely visible and totally
insignificant insects which I harbor. A heartless and most callous attitude! How can such
inconsiderate behavior possibly be justified by the presence in my coat of one or two thousand
footling fleas? The answer is, of course, that Article One of those Laws of Love (by which all
human creatures regulate their lives) specifically enjoins that “ye shall love one another for so
long as it serves thine individual interest.”
      Now that the human attitude towards me has so completely changed, I cannot exploit
manpower to ease my itching, however virulent it may become. I therefore have no choice but
to resort to the alternative method of finding relief in scraping myself on pine bark. To that end I
was just going down the veranda steps when I realized that even this alternative solution was a
silly idea and would not work. The point is that pines secrete an extremely sticky resin which,
once it has gummed the ends of my fur together, cannot be loosened even if struck by lightning,
or fired upon by the whole Russian Baltic Fleet. What’s more, as soon as five hairs stick
together, then ten, then thirty hairs get inextri-cably stuck. I am a dainty cat of candid
temperament, and any creature as clinging, poisonous, and vindictive as this tenacious resin is
an anath-ema to me. I cannot stand persons of that kind, and even if one such particular person
were the most beautiful cat in the world, let alone a creature loathsome as resin, still I’d be
revolted. It is outrageous that my charmingly pale gray coat can be ruined by a substance
whose social and evolutionary status is no higher than that of the gummy muck which streams
in the cold north wind from the corners of Rickshaw Blacky’s eyes. Resin ought to realize the
impropriety of its nature, but will, of course, do no such thing. Indeed, the very moment my
back makes contact with a pine tree, great clots of resin gather on my fur. To have anything to
do with so insensitive, so inconsiderate a creature would not only be beneath my personal
dignity, but would be a defilement to anyone in my coat and lineage. I conclude that, however
fleasome I may feel, I have no choice but to grin and bear it. Nonetheless, it is extremely
disheartening to find that the two standard means of alleviating my discomfort are both
unavailable. Unless I can quickly find some other solution, the irritation in my skin, and the
thought of gumminess in my mind, will bring me to a nervous breakdown.
      Sinking down upon my hind-legs into a thinking posture, I had scarcely begun my search for
bright ideas when an illuminating memory flashed upon me. Every so often my scruffy master
saunters off out of the house with a cake of soap and a hand towel. When he returns some
thirty or forty minutes later, his normally dull complexion, while not exactly glowing, has
nevertheless acquired a certain modest liveliness. If such expeditions can confer a sheen of
vitality upon that shabby sloven, what wonders they might work upon myself. It is, of course,
true that I am already so extremely handsome that improvements, if possible, are hardly
necessary, but if by some misfortune I were to fall sick and perish at this very tender age of
one year and a few odd months, I could never forgive myself for allowing so irremediable a loss
to be inflicted upon the populace of the world. I believe that the object of my master’s sorties is
one of those devices invented by mankind as a means of easing the tedium of its existence.
Inasmuch as the public bath is an invention of mankind, it can hardly be much use to anyone
but, clutching as I am at straws, I might as well investigate the matter. If it’s as pointless as I
anticipate, nothing would be simpler than to drop my enquiries; but I remain unsure whether
human beings are sufficiently broadminded to give a cat, a member of another species, even a
chance to investigate the efficacy of an institution devised for human purposes.
       I cannot imagine that I could be refused entry when nobody dreams of questioning the
casual comings and goings of my master, but it would be socially most embarrassing to find
myself turned from the door.
       Prudence suggests the wisdom of reconnaissance and, if I like the look of the place, then I
can hop in with a hand towel in my mouth. My plan of action formed, I set off for the public bath
at a properly leisurely pace.
       As one turns left around the corner from our side street, one may observe a little further up
the road an object like an upended bamboo waterpipe puffing thin smoke-fumes straight up into
the sky. That fum-ing finger marks the site of the public bathhouse. I stole in through its back
entrance. That style of entry is usually looked down upon as mean-spirited or cowardly, but
such criticisms are merely the tedious grumbles spiced with jealousy which one must expect
from persons only capable of gaining access by front doors. It is abundantly clear from the
records of history that persons of high intelligence invariably launch attacks both suddenly and
from the rear. Furthermore, I note from my study of The Making of a Gentleman (volume two,
chapter one, pages five and six) that a backdoor, like a gentleman’s last will and testament,
provides the means whereby an individual establishes his true moral excellence. Being a truly
twentieth-century cat, I have had included in my education, more than sufficient of such weighty
learning, to make it inappropriate for anyone to sneer at my selected mode of entry. Anyway,
once I was inside, I found on my immediate left a positive mountain of pine logs cut into eight-
inch lengths and, next to it, a heaped-up hill of coal. Some of my readers may wonder what the
subtle significance of my careful distinction between a mountain of logs and a mere hill of coal
is.
       There is, in fact, no subtle significance whatsoever. I simply used the two words, “hill” and
“mountain,” as they should correctly be used. Far from having time to think about literary
niceties, I am overwhelmed with pity for the human race which, having regularly dieted on such
revolting objects as rice, birds, fish, and even animals, is now apparently reduced to munching
lumps of coal. Right in front of me I see an open entrance about six feet wide. I peep through
and find everything dead quiet but, from somewhere beyond, there comes a lively buzz of
human voices and I deduce that the bath must be where the sound originates. I move forward
between the woodpile and the coal heap, turn left and find a glazed window to my right. On the
ledge below, a considerable number of small round tubs is piled up into a pyramid. My heart
goes out to them, for it must be painfully contrary to a round thing’s concept of reality to be
constricted within a triangular world. To the south of these piles the sill juts out for a few feet
with, as if to welcome me, wooden boarding on it. Since the board is roughly three feet up from
the ground, it is, from my point of view, at an ideal hopping height. “All right,” I said to myself,
and, as I flew up nimbly to the board, the public bath, like something dangled, suddenly
appeared beneath my very nose.
       There is nothing in the world more pleasant than to eat something one has never yet eaten,
or to see something one has never seen before.
       If my readers, like my master, spend thirty or forty minutes on three days of every passing
week in the world of the public bath, then of course that world can offer them few surprises: but
if, like me, they have never seen that spectacle, they should make immediate arrangements to
do so. Don’t worry about the deathbed of your parents, but at all costs do not miss the grand
show of the public bath. The world is wide, but in my opinion it has no sight more startlingly
remarkable to offer.
     Wherein, you ask, resides its crass spectacularity? Well, it is so variously spectacular that I
hesitate to particularize. First of all, the human beings vociferously swarming about beyond the
window-glass are all stark naked. As totally unclothed as Formosan aborigines. Primeval
Adams still prancing about in this twentieth century. I am moved by so much nudity to preface
my comments with a history of clothing, but it would take so long that I will spare my readers
any rehash of the learned observations of Herr Doktor Diogenes Teufelsdrockh in his
monumental study on this subject ( Die Kleider, Werden und Wizken) and simply refer them to
a slightly less learned commentary on that work, Mr. Thomas Carlyle’s Sartor Resartus. The
essential fact remains that the clothes are the man, that the ungarbed man is nothing. Skipping
centuries of sartorial civilization, indeed a tautological phrase, I would remind my readers that
Beau Nash, in the heyday of his social regulation of eighteenth-century Bath, a royally
patronized hotsprings spa in the west of England, established the inflexible rule that men and
women submerging themselves in those salutary waters should, nevertheless, be clothed from
their shoulders down to their feet. A further relevant incident occurred, again in a certain English
city, just after the midpoint of the nineteenth century. It so happened that this city then founded
a School of Art and, quite naturally, the school’s function involved the presence and display of
various studies, drawings, paintings, models, and statues of the naked human figure. But the
inauguration of this school placed both its own staff and the city fathers in a deeply
embarrassing situation. There could be no question but that the leading ladies of the city must
be invited to the opening ceremony. Unfortunately, all civilized females of that era were
unshakably sure that human beings are clothes-animals having no relationship whatsoever, let
alone blood-kinship, with the skin-clad apes.
     A man without his clothes, they knew it for a fact, was like an elephant shorn of its trunk, a
school without its students, soldiers devoid of courage. Anyone without the other of these pairs
would be so totally decharacterized as to become, if not a complete nonentity, at least an entity
of a basely transubstantiated nature, and a man so transubstanti-ated would be, at best, a
beast. The ladies, as the saying is, laid it on the line. “For us to consort with such beast-
humans, even though those bestialities were only present in the form of drawings and statues,
would compromise our honor. If they are to be present at the ceremony, we will not attend.”The
school authorities thought the ladies were all being a little silly but, in the West as in the East,
women, however physically unfit for the hard slog of pounding rice or of slashing about on the
battlefield, are indispensably ornamental features of any opening ceremony.
     What, then, could be done? The school authorities took themselves off to a draper’s shop,
bought thirty-five and seven-eighths rolls of suitable black material and clothed their beastly
prints, their less-than-human statues, in a hundred yards of humanizing huckaback. Lest any
lady’s modesty might be outraged accidentally, they even masked the faces of their statues in
swathes of sable stuffs. European marble and Hellenic plaster thus yashmaked out of the
animal kingdom, I am happy to record that the ceremony went off to the complete satisfaction
of all concerned.
     From those remarkable accounts the importance of clothes to mankind may be deduced.
But, very recently, there has been a swing in the opposite direction and people may now be
found who go about incessantly advocating nudity, praising nude pictures and generally making
a naked menace of themselves. I think they are in error. Indeed, since I have remained decently
clothed from the moment of my birth, how could I think otherwise? The craze for the nude
began when, at the Renaissance, the traditional customs of the ancient Greeks and Romans
were repopularized, for their own lewd ends, by the Italianate promot-ers of that cultural
rebirth. The ancient Greeks and Romans were culturally accustomed to nudity, and it is highly
unlikely that they recognized any connection between nakedness and public morality. But in
northern Europe the prevailing climate is cold. Even in Japan there is a saying that “one cannot
travel naked,” so that, by natural law, in Germany or England, a naked man is very soon a dead
one. Since dying is daft, northerners wear clothes. And when everyone wears clothes, human
beings become clothes-animals. And having once become clothes-animals, they are unable to
conceive that any naked animal whom they may happen to run across could possibly also be
human. Its absence of clobber immediately identifies its brutish nature. Consequently, it is
understandable that Europeans, especially northern Europeans, might regard nude pictures and
nude statues as essentially bestial. In other words, Europeans and Japanese have the good
sense to recognize nudes and representations of nudity as life-forms inferior to cats. But nudes
are beautiful, you say? What of it? Beasts, though beautiful, are beasts. Some of my more
knowledgeable readers, seeking to catch me in an inconsistency, may possibly ask whether I’ve
ever seen a European lady in evening dress? Inevitably, being only a cat, I’ve never had that
honor. But I am reliably advised that Western ladies in formal evening wear do in fact expose
their shoulders, arms, and even breasts, which is, of course, disgusting. Before Renaissance
times, women’s dress styles did not sink to such scandalous levels, to such ridiculous
decolletages. Instead, at all times women wore the clothes one would normally expect on any
human being. Why, then, have they transformed themselves to look like vulgar acrobats? It
would be far too wearisome to set down all the dreary history of that decadence. Let it suffice
that those who know the reasons, know them, and that those who don’t, don’t need to. In any
event, whatever the historical background, the fact remains that modern women, each and
every night, trick themselves out in virtual undress and evince the deepest self-satisfaction with
their bizarre appearances.
     However, it would seem that somewhere under that beastly brazenness, they retain some
spark of human feeling, because, as soon as the sun comes up, they cover their shoulders,
sleeve their arms, and tuck away their breasts. It is all the more odd in that, not only do they
sheathe themselves by day to the point of near invisibility, but they carry their lunacy to the
extreme of considering it extremely disgraceful to expose so much as a single day-lit toenail to
the public view. Such inane contra-riety surely proves that women’s evening dresses are the
brainchild of some gibbering conference of brain-damaged freaks. If women resent that logic,
why don’t they try walking about in the daytime with bared shoulders, arms, and breasts? The
same type of enquiry should also be addressed to nudists. If they are so besotted with the
nude, why don’t they strip their daughters? And why, while they’re about it, don’t they and their
families stroll around Ueno Park in no more than that nakedness they so affect to love? It can’t
be done, they say? But of course it can. The only reason why they hesitate is not, I bet,
because it can’t be done, but simply because Europeans don’t do it. The proof of my point is in
their dusk behavior. There they are, swaggering down to the lmpe-rial Hotel, all dolled-up in
those crazy evening dresses. What origin and history do such cockeyed costumes have?
Nothing indigenous. Our bird-brained ladies flaunt themselves in goose-skinned flesh and
feathers solely because that is the mode in Europe. Europeans are powerful, so it matters not
how ridiculous or daft their goings on, everyone must imitate even their daftest designs. Yield to
the long, and be trimmed down; yield to the powerful, and be humbled; yield to the weighty, and
be squashed. Prudence demands a due degree of yielding, but surely only dullards yield all
along the line, surely only chimpanzees ape everything they see. If my readers answer that they
can’t help being dullards, can’t help being born without ability to discriminate in imitation, then of
course I pardon them. But in that case, they must abandon all pretense that the Japanese are a
great nation. I might add that all my foregoing comments apply with equal force in the field of
academic studies, but, since I am here only concerned with questions of clothing, I will not now
press the scholastic parallels.
      I think I have established the importance of their clothes to human beings. Indeed, their
clothing is so demonstrably all-important to them that one may reasonably wonder whether
human beings are clothes, or clothes are the current acme of the evolutionary process. I am
tempted to suggest that human history is not the history of flesh and bone and blood, but a
mere chronicle of costumes. Things have indeed come to a pretty pass when a naked man is
seen, not as a man, but as a monster. If by mutual agreement all men were to become
monsters, obviously none would see anything monstrous in the others. Which would be a happy
situation, were it not that men would be unhappy with it. When mankind first appeared upon the
earth, a benign nature manufactured them to standard specifications, and all, equally naked,
were pitched forth into the world. Had mankind been created with an inborn readiness to be
content with equality, I cannot see why, born naked, they should have been discontent to live
and die unclothed. However, one of these primeval nudists seems to have communed with
himself along the following lines. “Since I and all my fellowman are indistinguishably alike, what
is the point of effort? However hard I strive, I cannot of myself climb beyond the common rut.
So, since I yearn to be conspicuous, I think I’ll drape myself in something that will draw the
eyes and blow the minds of all these clones around me.” I would guess that he thought and
thought for at least ten years before he came up with a stupendous idea, that glory of man’s
inventiveness, pants. He put them on at once and, puffed up with pride and all primordial
pompousness, paraded about among his startled fellows. From him descend today’s
quaintclouted rickshawmen. It seems a little strange to have taken ten long years to think up
something as simple, and as brief, as shorts, but the strangeness is only a kind of optical
illusion created by time’s immensely long perspective. In the days of man’s remote antiquity, no
such breathtaking invention as pants had ever been achieved. I’ve heard that it took Descartes,
no intellectual slouch, a full ten years to arrive at his famous conclusion, obvious surely to any
three-year-old, that I think and therefore I am. Since original thought is thus demonstrably
difficult, perhaps one should concede that it was an intellectual feat, even if it took ten years,
for the wits of proto-rickshawman to formulate the notion of knickers. In any event, ennobled by
their knickers, the breed of rickshawmen became lords of creation and stalked the highways of
the world with such overweening pride that some of the more spirited among the cloutless
monsters were provoked into competition. Judging by its uselessness, I would guess that they
spent a mere six years in planning their particular invention, the good-for-nothing surcoat. The
knickers’ glory faded and the golden age of surcoats shone upon the world, and from those
innovators are descended all the green-grocers, chemists, drapers, and haberdashers of today.
When twilight fell, first upon knickers and then upon surcoats, there came the dawn of
Japanese skirted-trousers. These were designed by monsters peeved by the surcoat boom,
and the descendants of their inventors include both the warriors of medieval times and all
contemporary government officials. The plain, if regrettable, fact is that all the originally naked
monsters strove vaingloriously to outdo each other in the novelty and weirdness of their gear.
The ultimate grotesquerie has only recently appeared in swallow-tailed jackets. Yet if one
ponders the history of these quaint manifestations, one recognizes that there is nothing random
in their occurrence.
      The development was neither haphazard nor aimless. On the contrary, it is man’s deathless
eagerness to compete, the driving stretch of his intrepid spirit, his resolute determination to
outdo all other members of his species, which has guided the production of successive styles of
clothing. A member of this species does not go around shouting aloud that he or she differs in
himself (or herself) from others of the species: instead each one goes about wearing different
clothes. From this observed behavior a major psychological truth about this race of forked
destroyers may be deduced: that, just as nature abhors a vacuum,
      “mankind abhors equality.” Being thus psychologically determined, they now have no choice
whatsoever but to continue enveloping themselves in clothes and would regard a deprivation
thereof with as much alarm as they would face a cutting off of flesh or the removal of a bone.
To them it would be absolute madness to cast their various clouts, a ripping away of their
essential human substance, and as unthinkable to attempt a return to their original condition of
equality. Even if they could bear the shame of being accounted lunatics, it would not be feasible
to return to a state of nature in which, by all civilized standards, they would automatically
become not merely lunatics but monsters. Even if all the billions of human inhabitants of this
globe could be rehabilitated as monsters, even if they were purged of their shame by total
reassurance that, since all were monsters, none were monsters, believe you me, it still would
do no good. The very next day after the reign of equality among monsters had been re-
established, the monsters would be at it once again. If they can’t compete with their clothes on,
then they will compete as monsters. With every man-jack stark-staring naked, they would begin
to differentiate between degrees of staring starkness. For which reason alone, it would, I think,
be best if clothes were not abandoned.
      It is consequently incredible that the assorted human creatures now displayed before my
very eyes should have taken off their clothes.
      Surcoats, skirted trousers, even their smallest smalls, things from which their owners would
as soon be parted as from their guts and bladders, are all stacked up on shelves while the
recreated monsters are, with complete composure, even chatting, scandalously exposing their
archetypal nudity to the public view. Are you surprised then, gentle readers, that some time
back I described this scene as genuinely spectacular? Shocked as I was, and am, it will be my
honor to record for the benefit of all truly civilized gentlemen as much as I can of this
extraordinary sight.
      I must start by confessing that, faced by such mind-boggling chaos, I don’t know how to
start describing it. The monsters show no method in their madness, and it consequently is
difficult to systematize analysis thereof. Of course, I can’t be sure that it actually is a bath, but I
make the wild surmise that it can’t be anything else. It is about three feet wide and nine feet
long, and is divided by an upright board into two sections.
      One section contains white-colored bathwater. I understand that this is what they call a
medicated bath: it has a turbid look, as though lime had been dissolved in it. Actually, it looks
not only turbid with lime, but also heavily charged and scummed with grease. It’s hardly a
wonder that it looks so whitely stale, for I’m told that the water is changed but once a week.
The other section comprises the ordinary bath, but, here again, by no stretch of the imagination
could its water be described as crystal clear or pellucid. It has the peculiarly repulsive color of
stirred rainwater which, against the danger of fire, has stood for months in a rain tank on a
public street. Next, though the effort kills me, I will describe the monsters themselves. I see two
youngsters standing beside that tank of dirty water. They stand facing each other and are
pouring pail after pail of hot water over each other’s bellies. Which certainly seems a
worthwhile occupation. The two men are faultlessly developed, so far as the sun-burnt
blackness of their skin is concerned. As I watch them, thinking that these monsters have
remarkably sturdy figures, one of them, pawing at his chest with a hand towel, suddenly speaks
to the other.
     “Kin, old man, I’ve got a pain right here. I wonder what it is.”
     “That’s your stomach. Stomach pains can kill you. You’d better watch it carefully,” is Kin’s
most earnest advice.
     “But it’s here, on my left,” says the first one, pointing at his left lung.
     “Sure, that there’s your stomach. On the left, the stomach, and on the right, the lung.”
     “Really? I thought the stomach was about here,” and this time he taps himself lightly on the
hip.
     “Don’t be silly, that’s the lumbago,” Kin mockingly replies.
     At this point, a man of about twenty-five or twenty-six and sporting a thin moustache
jumped into the bath with a plop. Next minute, the soap and loosened dirt upon his body rose to
the surface, and the water glinted richly as if it might be mined for mineral wealth. Right beside
him a bald-headed old man is talking to some close-cropped crony. Only their heads are visible
above the water.
     “Nothing’s much fun anymore when you get to be old like me. Once one gets decrepit, one
can’t keep up with the youngsters. But when it comes to a hot bath, even though they say that
only lads can take real heat, that, for me, must still be really hot. Otherwise,” the old man
boastfully observed, “I don’t feel right.”
     “But you, sir, are in spanking health. Not bad at all to be as energetic as you are.”
     “I’m not all that energetic, you know. I only manage to keep free from illness. A man, they
say, should live to be a hundred and twenty provided he does nothing bad.”
     “What! Does one live as long as that?”
     “Of course. I guarantee it up to a hundred and twenty. In the days before the Restoration
there was a family called Magaribuchi-they were personal retainers of the Shogun—they used
to live up here in Tokyo at Ushigome—and one of their male servants lived to a hundred and
thirty.”
     “That’s a remarkable age.”
     “Yes, indeed. He was in fact so old that he’d clean forgotten his age.
     He told me he could remember it until he turned a hundred, but then he just lost count.
Anyway, when I knew him he was a hundred and thirty and still going strong. I don’t know
what’s become of him. For all I know, he may be out there still, still alive and kicking.” So
saying, he emerged from the bath. His whiskered friend remained in the water, grinning to
himself and scattering all around him suds that glittered like small flecks of mica. The man who
thereupon got into the bath was certainly no ordinary monster; for all across his back was
spread a vast tattoo. It seemed to represent that legendary hero, lwami Jutaro-, about to
decapitate a python with a huge high-brandished sword. For some sad reason, the tattoo has
not yet been completed and the python must be guessed at. The great Jutaro-looks a mite
discomfited. As this illustrated man jumped into the water, “Much too tepid,” he remarked. The
man entering immediately behind him seems disposed to agree. “Oh dear,” he says, “they
ought to heat it up a bit.” Just the same his features crack into a strained grimace, as though
the water were in fact too hot for him.
     Finding himself right next to the tattooed monster, “Hello, chief,” he greets him.
     The tattooed monster nodded and, after a while, enquired “And how is Mr. Tami?”
     “Couldn’t say. He’s gone so potty about gambling. . . ”
     “Not just gambling. . . ”
     “So? There’s something wrong with that one. He’s always bloody-minded. I don’t know, but
no one really likes him. Can’t quite put a finger on it. Somehow one can’t quite trust him. A man
with a trade just shouldn’t be like that.”
     “Exactly. Mr. Tami is rather too pleased with himself. Too damn stuck up, I’d say. That’s
why folk don’t trust him. Wouldn’t you say?”
     “You’re right. He thinks he’s in a class by himself. Which never pays.”
     “All the old craftsmen around here are dying off. The only ones left are you, Mr. Moto the
cooper, the master brickmaker, and that’s about it. Of course, as you know, I too was born in
these parts. But just take Mr. Tami. Nobody knows where he sprang from.”
     “True. It’s a wonder that he’s come as far as he has.”
     “Indeed it is. Somehow nobody likes him. Nobody even wants to pass the time of day with
such an awkward bastard.” Poor old Mr. Tami is getting it in the neck from all and sundry.
     Shifting my gaze away from the section filled with filthy rainwater, I now concentrate upon
the section filled with limey goo. It proves to be packed with people. Indeed, it would be more
exact to describe it as containing hot water between men rather than as containing men in its
hot water. All the creatures here are, moreover, quite remarkably lethargic.
     For quite some time now, men have been climbing in but none has yet climbed out. One
cannot wonder that the water gets fouled when so many people use it and a whole week
trundles by before the water’s changed. Duly impressed by the turmoil in that tub, I peered
more deeply among its tight-squeezed monsters and there I found my wretched master
cowering in the left-hand corner, squashed and par-boiled poppy-red. Poor old thing! Someone
ought to make a gap and let him scramble out. But no one seems willing to budge an inch, and
indeed my master himself appears perfectly happy to stay where he is.
     He simply stands there motionless as his skin climbs through the gradu-ations of red to a
vile vermilion. What a ghastly ordeal! I guess his readiness to suffer such dire reddening
reflects a determination to extract his full two farthings worth in return for the bathhouse fee.
But, devoted as I am to that dim monster of mine, I cannot sit here comfy on my ledge without
worrying lest, dizzied by steam and medicating chemicals, he drown if he dallies longer. As
these thoughts drifted through my mind, the fellow floating next to my master frowns and then
remarks, “All the same, this is a bit too strong. It’s boiling up, really scorching, from somewhere
here behind me.” I deduce that, reluctant to come out with a flat complaint which might impugn
his manliness, he is trying indirectly to rouse the sympathy of his boiling fellow-monsters.
     “Oh no, this is just about right. Any cooler, and a medicinal bath has no effect at all. Back
where I come from we take them twice as hot as this.” Some braggart speaks from the depths
of swirling steam.
     “Anyway, what the hell kind of good can these baths do?” enquires another monster who
has covered his knobbly head with a neatly folded hand towel.
     “It’s good for all sorts of things. They say it’s good for everything. In fact, it’s terrific,”
replies a man with a face one could mistake, as much by reason of its color as of its shape, for
a haggard cucumber. I thought to myself that if these limey waves are truly so effective, he
ought to at least look a little more plump, a little more firm on the vine.
     “I always say that the first day, when they put the medicine in, is not the best for results.
One needs to wait until the third day, even the fourth. Today, for instance, everything’s just
about right.” This knowing comment, accompanied by an equally knowing look, came from a
fat-tish man. Perhaps his chubbiness is really no more than layers of dirt deposited by the
water.
     “Would it, d’you think, be good to drink?” asks a high-pitched queru-lous voice which
quavers up from somewhere unidentifiable.
     “If you feel a cold coming on, down a mugful just before going to bed. If you do that, you
won’t need to wake up in the night to go for a pee. It’s quite extraordinary. You ought to try it.”
Again, I cannot tell from which of the steam-wreathed faces this wisdom bubbled out.
     Turning my gaze from the baths, I stare down at the duckboards on the bathhouse floor
where rows of naked men are sitting and sprawling in ugly disarray. Each adopts the posture
that best suits him for scrub-bing away at whichsoever portion of his body occupies his
attention.
     Among these seriously contorted nudists, two attract my most astonished stare. One, flat
on his back gawping up at the skylight; the other, flat on his stomach, is peering down the
drainhole in the floor. Their utter self-abandonment, the totality of their idleness, is somehow
deeply impressive. In another part of the forest, as Shakespeare pleasantly put it, a man with a
shaven head squats down with his face to the stone of the wall while a younger, smaller man,
also shaven-pated, stands behind him pounding away at his shoulders. They seem to have
some kind of master-pupil relationship, and the pupil-type is busy playing the part of an unpaid
bath attendant. There is, of course, a genuine bath attendant also somewhere on the scene. He
is, in fact, not giving anyone a massage but merely tilting heated water out of an oblong pail
over the shoulders of a seated patron. He looks as though he must have caught a cold
because, despite the fearful hotness of the place, he’s wearing a sort of padded sleeveless
vest. I notice that, by a crooking of his right big toe, his foot is gripped on a camlet rag.
     My glance drifts away to light upon a selfish monster hoarding no less than three wash
pails for himself. Oddly enough, he keeps pressing his neighbor to make use of his soap;
perhaps in order to inflict upon that defenseless creature a long and slightly loony flow of talk. I
strain my ears to catch the conversation, which is, in truth, a monologue. “A gun is an imported
thing. Something foreign, not something Japanese. In the good old days it was all a matter of
sword against sword. But foreigners are cowards, so they dreamt up something dastardly like
guns. They don’t come from China, though. Long-range fighting with guns is what you’d expect
from one of those Western countries. There weren’t any guns in the days of Coxinga who, for
all his Chinese name, was descended from the Emperor Seiwa through the Minamoto line.
Yoshitsune, the best of the Minamotos, was not killed when they say he was. No, indeed.
Instead he fled from Hokkaido to Manchuria, taking with him a Hokkaido man especially good at
giving advice. Then Yoshitsune’s son, calling himself a Manchurian, attacked the Emperor of
China and the Great Ming was flat flummoxed. So what did he do? He sent a messenger to the
third Tokugawa Shogun begging for the loan of three thousand soldiers. But the Shogun kept
the messenger waiting in Japan for two whole years. I can’t remember the messenger’s name,
but he had some name or other. In the end the Shogun sent him down to Nagasaki where he
got mixed up with a prostitute. She then had a son. And that son was Coxinga. Of course, when
the messenger at last got home to China, he found that the Emperor of the Ming had been
destroyed by traitors. . .”
     I can’t make heads or tails of this amazing rigmarole. It sounds so totally barmy, so crazed
a mixture of garbled legends and historical untruths, that my attention again drifts away to focus
on a gloomy looking fellow, maybe twenty-five or twenty-six years old, who appears to be
steaming his crotch in the medicated water. He wears a vacant expression and seems to be
suffering from a swelling or something. The very young man of seventeen or eighteen who sits
beside him, talking in an affected manner, is presumably some houseboy from the
neighborhood. Next to this mincing youth I see an odd looking back. Each joint in its spine sticks
jaggedly out as though a knotted, bamboo rod had been rammed up under the skin from
somewhere down between the buttocks. On either side of the spine, perfectly aligned, are four
black marks like peg holes on a piquet board. All eight places are inflamed, some of them
oozing pus.
     Though I’ve tried to describe each thing as it appeared before my eyes, I now realize that
there’s still so much to write about that, with my limited skill, I can never set down more than a
fraction of the totality. I was quietly flinching from the consequences of my own rash undertak-
ing to describe in every detail the more spectacular features of a bathhouse when a bald-
skulled oldster, maybe seventy years old and dressed in a light-blue, cotton kimono, suddenly
appeared at the entrance. This hairless apparition bowed reverentially to his drove of naked
monsters and then addressed them with the greatest fluency. “Good sirs,” he says,
     “I thank you for your regular and daily visits to my humble establishment. Today it is,
beyond these friendly walls, more than a little chilly; so please, I beg of you, take your time,
both within and without my spotless baths, to warm yourselves at comfortable leisure. Hey, you
there you in charge of the baths, make quite sure that the water is kept at precisely the proper
temperature.”
     To which the bath attendant briefly answers, “Right.”
     “Now there’s an amiable fellow,” says the cracked historian of the doings of Coxinga,
speaking admiringly of the aged proprietor. “To run this kind of business, you have to have his
knack for it.”
     I was so struck by the sudden appearance of this strange old man that I decided to
discontinue my overall surveillance of the bathhouse scene while I concentrated upon a more
particularized scanning of so rum an individual. As I watched him, the old man, catching sight of
a child some four years old who has just finished bathing, extends a mottled hand and, in that
wheedling voice with which the old present their false advances to the young, calls out, “Come
over here, my master.” The child, frightened by that trampled pudding of a face which the gaffer
bent upon him, promptly began to scream. The old man looked surprised. “Why! you’re crying!
What’s the matter? Frightened of the old man? Well, I never!” His voice showed that he was
genuinely astonished but, soon giving up this coaxing as a bad job, he quickly switched his
attentions to the child’s father. “Hello, Gen-san! How are you? A bit cold today, eh? And what
about that burglar who broke into the big shop round the corner? Must have been a fathead. He
cut a square hole in the wooden side-gate but then, can you believe it, took off without nicking a
thing. Must have seen a copper or a watchman, I suppose. But what a waste of effort, eh!” Still
grinning at the idea of the burglar’s rash stupidity, he turns to someone else. “Isn’t it cold,
though! Perhaps, being young, you don’t yet feel how it bites.” It seems to me that, unique in his
antiquity, he’s the only person in the building who feels the cold at all.
      Having been thus absorbed for several minutes in studying the old man’s antics, I had
virtually forgotten about all the other monsters, including my own master who was presumably
still wedged in his boiling corner. I was jerked from my absorption by a sudden loud shouting in
the middle of the room. And who should be the source of it but Mr.
      Sneaze himself. That my master’s voice should be overloud and dis-agreeably indistinct is
nothing new, but I was a little surprised to hear it raised in this particular place. I guessed in a
flash that his raucous yaw-ping had been caused by a rush of blood to his noddle in
consequence of his unwisely protracted immersion in water heated up to cure all ills.
      Naturally, no one would object to such a hullaballoo, however raspingly unpleasant, if it
were brought on by physical distress: but, as grew obvious soon enough, my beloved master,
far from being geyser-dizzied out of his normal senses, was in fact being very much his own
true self when he started bawling in that thickly violent voice. For the cause of the nasty uproar
was a childishly idiotic squabble which he had started with some conceited pup, some totally
insignificant houseboy.
      “Get away from here! Go on, further off! You’re splashing water into my pail.” His shouting
scraped one’s eardrums. One’s attitude to such outbursts depends, of course, upon one’s point
of view. One could, for instance, as I had done, conclude he had just gone potty with the heat.
      Another, perhaps one generous-minded person in ten thousand, might see a parallel with
that courageous tongue lashing which Takayama Hikokuro dared to inflict upon a bandit. For all
I know, that may have been precisely how my master saw himself. But since the houseboy
clearly does not see himself in the bandit’s role, we are unlikely to witness a successful
repetition of that historic encounter.
      “I was sitting here long before you came and plumped yourself down.” The boy’s reply,
calmly delivered over his shoulder, was not unreasonable. But, since that answer made it clear
that the lad was not prepared to budge, it did not please my master. My master, even though
his blood was up, must have realized that neither the words nor the style of their delivery could
really be picked upon as those of a bandit, but his howling outburst was not in fact occasioned
by the boy’s propinquity or any splashing of water. The truth was that, for some considerable
time, the boy and his equally young companion had been swapping remarks in a pertly
unpleasing manner utterly inappropriate to their age. My master had endured their prattle for as
long as he could but, more and more exasperated, had finally blown up. Consequently, even
though he had been perfectly civilly answered, the real cause of his fury remained unsoothed
and he could not bring himself to leave the place without a last explosion of his heart.
“Hobbledehoys,” he shouted. “Damned young idiots. Splashing your dirty water in other
people’s pails.”
      In my own heart of hearts I felt considerable sympathy for my master, because I, too, had
found the boys’ behavior actively distasteful.
      Nevertheless, I was bound to regard my master’s behavior during the incident as conduct
unbecoming in a teacher. The trouble is that he is, by nature, something of a dry, old stick. Far
too strict and far too rigid.
      Not only is he as rough and dessicated as a lump of coke, but he’s also cinder-hard. I’m
told that years ago when Hannibal was crossing the Alps, the advance of his army was
impeded by a gigantic rock inconveniently blocking the mountain path. Hannibal is said to have
soused the stone with vinegar and then to have lit a bonfire underneath it. The rock thus
softened, he sawed it into segments, like someone slicing fish-paste, and so passed all his
army safely on its way. A man like my master, on whom no effect whatsoever is produced by
hours of steady boiling in a medicated bath, ought perhaps to be soused with vinegar and then
grilled on an open fire. Failing some such treatment, his granitic obstinacy will not be softened
though hordes of houseboys niggle away at the igneous rock of his nature for a hundred
thousand years.
      The objects floating in the bath and lazing about on the bathroom’s floor are all monsters,
teratoids dehumanized by the husking of their clothes; as such, they cannot be judged by
normal civilized standards. In their teratical world anyone can do what he likes, anything can
happen.
      A stomach can resite itself in a pulmonary location; Coxinga can be blood-kin to the Seiwa
Minamotos; and that Mr. Tami, much maligned, may well be unreliable. But as soon as those
naked objects emerge from their bathhouse into the normal world, they garb themselves in
obedience to the requirements of civilization and, once robed, they resume the nature and
behavior patterns of human beings. My master stands on the threshold between two worlds.
Standing as he does between the bathroom and the changing room, he is poised at the verge
of his return to worldliness, to the sad mundanities of man, to the suavities of compromise, the
specious words, and the accommodating practices of his species in society. If, on the verge of
returning to that world, he yet maintains so brute an obstinacy, surely his mokelike
stubbornness must be a deep-rooted disease; a disease, indeed, so very firmly rooted as to be
virtually ineradicable.
      In my humble opinion, there is only one cure for his condition, and that would be to get the
principal of his school to give him the sack. My master, being unable to adapt himself to any
change of circumstances, would, if sacked, undoubtedly end up on the streets, and, if thus
turned adrift, would equally certainly die in the gutter. In short, to sack him would be to kill him.
My master loves being ill, but he would very much hate to die. He welters in hypochondriacal
orgies of self-pity, but lacks the strength of soul to seriously look on death. Consequently, if
anyone scares him with the news that some continued illness must Iead to his demise, my
craven master will immediately be both terrified out of his wits and, as I see it, terrified also into
the best of health. Only the terror of death by dismissal can shrivel the roots of his almost
ineradicable stubbornness. And if dismissal doesn’t do the trick, well then, that, I’m afraid, is
that, and the poor old perisher will perish. Still, in all, that foolish, fond old man, sick or well,
remains my master. It was he who in my kittenhood took me in and fed me. I recall the tale of
the Chinese poet who, given a meal when starving, later repaid that debt by saving his
benefactor’s life, and I consider it should not be impossible for a cat at least to be moved by his
master’s fate.
      My soul brims full with pity and I become so preoccupied with the internal spectacle of the
generous workings of my own deep-feeling heart that, once again, my attention wandered from
the scene sprawled out below me. I was sharply brought back to reality by a hubbub of abuse
coming from the medicinal bath. Thinking that maybe another squabble has broken out, I shift
my gaze to find the throng of monsters all shoving and shouting as they struggle to get out of
the narrow cleft of the adit to the bath. Horribly hairy legs and horrible hairless things are
juxtaposed and tangled in a horrible squirm to escape. It is the early evening of an autumn day,
and a red-gold flattish light burns here and there upon the boiling steam which rises up to the
ceiling. Through the hot, foggy veils whose swirlings fill the room I catch appalling glimpses of
wild stampeding monsters. Their shrieks and bellows pierce my ears, and from all sides their
agonized shouting that the bloody water’s boiling, mix in my skull as one loud howl of anguish.
The shouts were mul-ticolored: some yellow with sheer fear, some a despairing blue, some
furiously scarlet, some a revengeful black. They spilt across each other, filling the bathroom
with crashing columns of indescribable noise, the din of pandemonium, such sounds as have no
context but Hell and the public bathhouse. Fascinated by this truly awful sight, I just stood there
as though riveted to my ledge. The hideous roar climbed to a sort of blubbering climax where
the pressure of mindless sound seemed just about to burst the walls apart when, from the
swaying mass of turnbling naked bodies, a veritable giant lifted into view. He stands a good
three inches taller than the tallest of his fellows. Not only that, but his radish-colored face is
thickly bearded. The effect is so remarkable that one daren’t affirm that the beard is actually
growing on that face. It might be that the face has somehow got entangled in that beard. This
apparition emits a booming sound like a large, cracked temple bell struck in the heat of noon.
“Pour in cold water. Quick,” he thundered. “This bath is on the boil.” Both voice and face
towered above the squawking rabble around him, and for a moment a sort of silence reigned.
The giant had become the only person in the room. A superman; a living embodiment of
Nietzsche’s vision of Uebermensch; the Demon King among his swarm of devils; the master-
monster; Tyrannosaurus Rex. As I stood goggling at him, someone beyond the bath answered
through the sudden calm with a grunting cry of, “Yah.” Assent? Derision? I shall never know.
     All I can say is that when I peered through the dark haze to identify the source of that
ambiguous response, I could just make out the figure of the bathhouse attendant, padded still in
his sleeveless vest, using all his strength to heave a whacking great lump of coal into the
opened lid of the furnace. The coal made cracking sounds, and the attendant’s profile came
radiantly alight. Behind his body the brick wall gleamed with fire and the reflected glare burned
at me through the darkness.
     Thoroughly alarmed, I reared back from the window and, with one turning spring, hopped
down and ran off home. But as I ran I pondered what I’d seen and the conclusions were clear.
Although the human creatures in that bathhouse had been seeking a monstrous equality by
stripping off their clothes, even from that leveling stark-nakedness a hero had emerged to
tower above his fellows. I did not know what had happened to that hero, but I was certainly
sure that equality is unachievable, however stark things may become.
     On reaching home, I find that all is peaceful. My master, his face still glowing from the bath,
is quietly eating supper: but, catching sight of me as I jump up onto the veranda, he breaks his
silence to remark, “What a happy-go-lucky cat! I wonder what he’s been up to, coming home
as late as this.”
     My master has little money, but I note that on the table tonight there are laden dishes for a
three-course meal. Grilled fish will be one of them. I don’t know what the fish is called, but I
guess it was probably caught in the sea off Shinagawa sometime yesterday. I have already
expatiated at length upon the natural healthiness of fish as fostered by their salt environment;
however, once a fish has been caught and boiled or, like this one, grilled, questions of
environmental advantage are just no longer relevant. This fish would have done much better to
stay alive in the sea, even if, in the course of time, it had eventually to suffer such ills as all fish-
flesh is heir to. So thinking, I sat myself down beside the table.
     I pretended not to look while looking; looking, in particular, for a chance to snatch a piece
of anything edible. Those who do not know how to look while not looking must give up any hope
of ever eating good fish. My master pecked in silence at the fish, but soon put down his
chopsticks as if to say that he didn’t much like the taste. His wife, seated directly opposite him
in matching silence, is anxiously watching how his chopsticks move up and down and whether
my master’s jaws are opening and closing.
     “I say,” he suddenly asked her, “give that cat a whack on the head.”
     “What happens if I whack it?”
     “Never you mind what happens: just whack it.”
     “Like this?” asks his wife, tapping my head with the palm of her hand.
     It didn’t hurt at all.
     “Well, look at that! It didn’t give the least miaow.”
     “No,” she says, “it didn’t.”
     “Then whack it again.”
     “It’ll be just the same, however often I try.” She gave me another tap on the head.
     Since I still felt nothing, I naturally kept quiet. But what could be the point of these peculiar
orders? As a prudent and intelligent cat, I find my master’s behavior utterly incomprehensible.
Any person who could understand what he’s driving at, would then know how to react, but it’s
not that easy. His wife is simply told to “whack it,” but she, the whack-er, is self-statedly at a
loss to know why she should whack; I, the unfortunate whackee, am no less lost to understand
what it’s all about. My master is becoming a little edgily impatient, for twice already his
instructions have failed to produce the result which he only knows that he desires. It is therefore
almost sharply that he says, “Whack it so that it miaows.”
     His wife assumed a resigned sort of expression and wearily asking,
     “Why on earth should you want to make the wretched thing miaow?”
     gave me another, slightly harder, slap. Now that I know what he wants, it’s all absurdly
easy. I can satisfy my master with a mere miaow, but it’s really rather depressing, not just to
witness but actually to participate in, yet another demonstration of his addlepated conduct. If he
wanted me to miaow, he should have said so. His wife would have been spared two or three
totally unnecessary efforts, and I would not have needed to endure more than a single whack.
An order to whack should only be given when only a whack is wanted, but in this case what
was wanted was simply a miaow. Now whacking may indeed fall within his sphere of
responsibility, but miaowing lies in mine. It’s a damned impertinence that he should dare to
assume that an instruction to whack includes, or implies, an instruction to miaow, which is a
matter totally within my discretion. If he is taking my miaows for granted, indeed he presumes
too far. Such failure to respect another person’s personality, a deadly insult to any cat, is the
sort of crude insensitivity which one must expect from creatures like my master’s own particular
pet aversion, the nauseous Mr.
     Goldfield. But the same behavior on the part of my master, a man so confident of his open-
heartedness that he struts about stark-naked, can only be seen as an act of unwonted
weakness. Yet, as I know, my master is not mean. From which it follows that his venture into
whacking was not motivated by any deviousness or malice. In my opinion, his orders were
hatched in a brain as guileless and dim as that of a mosquito larva.
     If one gobbles rice, one’s stomach becomes full. If one is cut, one bleeds.
     If one is killed, one dies. Therefore, such reasoning runs, if one is whacked, one must
perforce miaow. Though I have done my best to justify my master’s ways toward me, I regret
to be bound to point out the clottish absurdity of such a style of logic. For if one were to concur
in that logic, it would follow that if one falls in a river, one is required to drown; that if one eats
fried fish, one must then get the squatters; that if one gets a salary, one must turn up for work;
and that if one studies books, one cannot fail to make oneself a great name in the world. If that
were the way things worked, there’d be some a bit embarrassed. I, for instance, would find it
annoying to be obliged to miaow when whacked.
      What, I ask, would be the point of being born a cat if, like the bell-clock at Mejiro, one is
expected to give off sounds every time one’s struck?
      Having thus mentally reprimanded my presumptuous master, then and then only I obliged
him with a mew.
      As soon as I miaowed, my master turned to his wife. “Hear that?” he said. “Now tell me, is
a miaow an interjection or an adverb?”
      The question was so abrupt that Mrs. Sneaze said nothing. To tell the truth, my own
immediate reaction was to think that, after all, he really had been driven out of his mind by his
experiences in the bathhouse. He is, of course, well-known in the neighborhood for his
eccentricities. I’ve even heard him called a clear case of neurosis. However, my master’s self-
conceit is so unshakable that he insists that, far from being a neurotic himself, it is his
detractors in whom neurotic tendencies are clear. When his neighbors call him a dog, he calls
them, in mere fairness, so he puts it, filthy pigs. He seems, indeed, besotted with maintaining
his ideas of fairness: to the point of being a positive public nuisance. He really sees nothing odd
in asking questions as ludicrous as that last enquiry to his wife about the proper parsing of a
cat’s miaow, but to the general run of his listeners his questions do suggest a certain mental
instability. In any event, his wife, understandably mystified, makes no attempt to answer him.
For obvious reasons, I too can offer nothing in reply.
      My master waited for a moment and then, in a loud voice, suddenly shouted out, “Hey!”
      His wife looked up in surprise and answered, “Yes?”
      “Is that ‘yes’ an interjection or an adverb? Tell me now, which is it?”
      “Whichever it is, it surely doesn’t matter. What a silly thing to ask!”
      “On the contrary, it matters a very great deal. That grammatical problem is an issue
currently preoccupying the best brains among leading authorities on linguistics in Japan.”
      “Gracious me! You mean that our leading authorities are bending their brains to a cat’s
miaow? What a dreadful state of affairs. Anyway, cats don’t speak in Japanese. Surely, a
miaow is a word from the language of cats.”
      “That’s precisely the point. The problem is a hard one in the very difficult field of
comparative linguistics.”
      “Is that indeed so?” It is clear that she is sufficiently intelligent to be disinterested in such
silly matters. “And have these leading authorities yet discovered what part of speech compares
with a cat’s miaow?”
      “It’s so serious a problem that it can’t immediately be resolved.” He munches away at that
fish, and then proceeds to tuck into the next course of stewed pork and potatoes.
      “This will be pork, won’t it?”
      “Yes, it’s pork.”
      “Huh,” he grunted in tones of deep disdain. “Huh,” and then guzzled it down. Thereafter,
holding out a saké cup, “I’ll have another cup.”
      “You’re drinking rather a lot today. Already you look quite red.”
      “Certainly I’m drinking,” he began, but broke off to veer away on a new mad tack. “Do you
know,” he demanded, “the longest word in the world?”
     “I think I’ve heard it somewhere. Let me think now. Yes. Isn’t it ‘Hoshoji-no-Nyudo-Saki-no-
Kampaku-dajodaijin?’”
     “No, I don’t mean a title like that ‘Former Chief Adviser to the Emperor and Prime Minister.’
I mean a true, long word.”
     “Do you mean one of those crab-written sideways words from the West?”
     “Yes.”
     “Well then, no. That I wouldn’t know. But I do know that you’ve had quite enough saké.
You’ll have some rice now, won’t you? Right?”
     “Wrong. First I’ll drink some more. Would you like to know that longest word?”
     “All right. But after, you’ll have some rice?”
     “The word is ‘Archaiomelesidonophrunicherata.’”
     “You made it up.”
     “Of course I didn’t. It’s Greek.”
     “What does it mean in Japanese?”
     “I don’t know what it means. I only know its spelling. Even if written sparingly it will cover
about six and a quarter inches.”
     It is my master’s singularity that he makes this sort of statement, which most men would
vouchsafe in their cups, in dead cold sobriety.
     All the same, it’s certainly true that he’s drinking far too much tonight.
     He normally limits himself to no more than a couple of cups of saké, and he’s already
tossed back four. His normal dosage turns his face quite red, so the double dosage has
inevitably flushed his features to the color of red-hot tongs. He looks to be in some distress, but
he keeps on knocking them back. He extends the cup again. “One more,” he says.
     His wife, finding this really too much, makes a wry face. “Don’t you think you’ve had
enough? You’ll only get a pain.”
     “Never mind the pain. From now on, I’m going to train myself into a steady drinker. Oinachi
Keigetsu has recommended that I devote myself to drink.”
     “And who may this Keigetsu be?” Great and famous though he is, in the eyes of Mrs.
Sneaze he isn’t worth a ha’penny.
     “Keigetsu is a literary colleague, a first-rate critic of these present times. He has advised
me to spend less time at home communing with a cat, to get out and about, and to drink on all
occasions. Since he’s almost a doctor, albeit one of literature, it would seem all right to drink on
doctor’s orders.”
     “Don’t be so ridiculous! I don’t care what he’s called or who he is.
     It’s none of his business to urge other people to drink; especially people who happen to
have weak stomachs.”
     “He didn’t just recommend drinking. He also said I ought to be more sociable and take a
fling at the fast life: wine, women, song, even travel.”
     “Are you actually trying to tell me that a so-called first-class critic has been making such
outrageous suggestions? What kind of a man can he be? Truly, I’m shocked to learn that
presumably responsible literary figures would recommend that a married man should go out on
the loose.”
     “There’s nothing wrong with living it up. If I had the money, I wouldn’t need Keigetsu’s
encouragement before giving it a try.”
      “Well then, I’m very glad that you don’t have the money. It would be quite awful if a man
your age started gallivanting about with wanton girls and drunken half-wit critics.”
      “Since the idea seems to shock you, I’ll scrap my plans for kicking over the traces.
However, in consideration of that connubial self-sacrifice, you’ll have to take better care of your
husband and, in particular, serve him better dinners.”
      “I’m already doing the best I can on what you give me.”
      “Really? Well in that case, I’ll postpone my investigation of the fast life until I can afford it,
and, for tonight, I won’t take any more saké.”
      With what might just pass for a smile, he held out his rice bowl for his wife to fill from the
container. As I remember it, he thereupon got through three great bowlfuls of mixed rice and
tea.
      My meal that night consisted of three slices of pork and the grilled head of that nameless
fish.
VOLUME III
                                                 I



           HEN I WAS describing my fence trotting exercises,I must have mentioned that

W          bamboo fence which encloses my master’s garden. Beyond that fence to the south of
           us there is another dwelling, but it would be an error to assume that our neighbors
           are just anybody. Admittedly, it is a low-rent area, but Mr. Sneaze is a person of
some standing, and certainly not the sort of man to establish chatty relationships across a
backyard fence with any old Tom, Dick, or Harry. On the other side of our particular fence there
is an open space about thirty feet deep at the far end, in which stands a dark green row of five
or six heavily foliaged cypresses. If one looks at this scene from our veranda, the impression it
creates is of a deep and thickly wooded forest, and one feels that here is a lonely house in a
glade where some learned sage, indifferent to fame, and wealth, leads out his solitary life with
only a nameless cat for his companion. However, the cypresses do not, in fact, grow quite as
thickly as I’d like to make out, for through their greenery one can, with hurtful clarity, descry the
undistinguished roof of a cheap boarding house of which the only redeeming feature is its soul-
astounding name: Crane Flock Manor. You will appreciate that it consequently takes a real
effort of the imagination to fit my master as I’ve hitherto described him into such a high-falutin’
background. Yet, if that crumby boarding house can bear so grand a name, then surely my
master’s home deserves at least to be known as the Cave of the Sleeping Dragon. Since
there’s no tax on house names, one might as well select a name which sounds impressive.
Anyway, this open space to the south of us, of a north-south depth of some thirty feet, extends
on an east-west axis for about sixty feet along our bamboo fence, and then turns at a right
angle northward to run along the eastern side of the Cave of the Sleeping Dragon. Now it is in
this northern area that trouble has arisen.
     One might dare boast that this open space, stretching as it does around two whole sides of
our dwelling, is big enough to please anyone, but in point of fact not only the master of the
house but even I, the dragon’s resident sacred cat, are often at our wits’ end to know what to
do with so much emptiness. Just as the cypress trees lord it to the south, so to the north the
scene is dominated by some seven or eight paulownias standing in a row. Since those trees
have each now grown to be a good twelve inches around, one could make a pretty packet by
selling their highly fancied wood to the first clog-maker whom one pared to call in.
Unfortunately, even if my unworldly dragon could rise to such an idea, being no more than a
tenant of his cavern, he couldn’t put it into practice. My heart bleeds for my half-wit master.
Especially so when I recall that only the other day some lowly drudge of a porter at his school
came around and calmly cut a large branch from one tree. On his next visit he was sporting an
exceedingly fancy pair of paulownia-wood clogs and was boasting to everyone within earshot
that his clogs were made from the branch he’d stolen. Such cunning villains flourish; but for me
and for the rest of my master’s household, though those valuable paulownias are within our
daily grasp, they profit us nothing. There’s an old adage that to hold a gem invites misfortune,
which is generally interpreted to mean that it is opportunity which creates a thief. But in our sad
case the plain fact is that growing paulownias earn no money. There they are, as pointlessly
valuable as gold left in the ground, but the numbskull in this matter is neither myself nor my
master. It’s the landlord, Dembei, a man so dense, so deaf that even when his trees are
positively shouting for a clog-maker, begging aloud to be cut, he takes not the slightest notice,
but just comes and collects his rent. However, since I bear no grudge against our landlord, I’ll
say no more about his crazy conduct and revert to my main theme, that is to say, to the odd
series of events whereby that open space came to be the cause of so much strife and
tribulation. But if I tell you the inwardness of it all, you mustn’t, ever, let on to my master. These
words of mine, remember, are between you and me and the gatepost.
      The immediately obvious snag about that open space is that it is indeed entirely open:
unenclosed, no kind of fence around it. It is a breezy, easy, go-as-you-pleasy sort of right-of-
way: it is, in short, a good, honest open space. I must, however, confess that my use of the
present tense is misleading, for, more precisely, I should have said that it was a good honest
open space. As always, one cannot understand the present situation without tracing its
development back to causes rooted in the ancient past. Since even doctors cannot prescribe
cures unless they first have diagnosed the causes of disorder, I will take my time and,
beginning my story from its true beginning, go back to those days when my master first moved
into his present home.
      It’s always pleasant in the humid days of summer to have plenty of airy space around one’s
house. Of course such open sites offer to burglars the advantage of easy access, but there’s
little risk of burglary where there’s nothing worth the thieving. Hence my master’s house has
never stood in need of any kind of outer wall, thorn-hedge, stockade, or even the flimsiest
fence. However, it seems to me that the need for such defensive structures is really determined
by the nature of whatever creatures, human or animal, which happen to live on the other side of
any such open space. From which it follows that I must clarify the nature of the gentlemen
dwelling to the north of us. It may seem rather rash to call them gentlemen before I have clearly
established whether those beings are human or animal, but it’s usually safer to start by
assuming that everyone’s a gentleman. After all, we have the authority of the Chinese classics
for calling a sneak-thief hiding in the rafters a “gentleman on the beam.” However, the
gentlemen in our particular case are not, at least individually, criminal characters such as
trouble the police. Instead, the criminality of these neighbors seems to be a function of their
enormous number. For there are swarms of them. Swarms and swarms of pupils at a private
middle school which, rejoicing in the name of the Hall of the Descending Cloud, collects two yen
a month from each of eight hundred young gentlemen in return for training them to become even
yet more gentlemanly. But you’d be making a serious mistake if you deduced from the elegant
name of their school that all its students were gentlemen of elegance and taste. Just as no
crane ever flocks to the seedy roosts in Crane Flock Manor, just as the Cave of the Sleeping
Dragon in fact contains a cat, so the tasteful name of our neighboring school is an unreliable
indicator of the true degree of its occu-pants’ refinement. Since you have already learnt that a
madman like my master can be held to be included within the ranks of university men, even of
lecturers, you should have no difficulty in grasping what louts may well be numbered among the
inferentially polished gentlemen in the Hall of the Descending Cloud. If my point is still not clear,
a three-day visit to my master’s house will certainly drive it home.
      As I’ve already mentioned, when my master first moved into his house there was no fence
around the empty space; consequently, the gentlemen of the Hall, just like Rickshaw Blacky,
used to saunter about among the paulownias, chatting, eating from their lunchboxes, lying down
on the clumps of bamboo-grass, doing, in fact, whatever they fancied. After a while they began
using the paulownia grove for dumping their discardable rubbish—first the corpses of their
lunchboxes (that is to say, the bamboo wrapping-sheaths and odd sheets of old newspaper)—
but soon they took to dumping worn-out sandals, broken clogs, anything in fact that needed
pitching out. My master, typically indifferent, showed no concern about these developments and
did not even bother to lodge a protest. I don’t know whether he failed to notice what was going
on or whether, noticing, he decided not to make a fuss. In any event, those gentlemen from the
Hall seem to have grown ever more like gentlemen as they advanced in their education, for they
gradually extended their disgusting activities on the northern side of the open space to encroach
upon its southern area. If you object that a word like “encroach” should be used in reference to
gentlemen, I am willing to abandon it; however, there is in truth no other word to describe the
process whereby these gentlemen, like so many desert nomads, emerged from their paulownia
wastes to advance upon the cypresses. Inasmuch as the cypress trees stand right in front of
our living room, it was at first only the most daring of these elegant young men who dared to
venture so far, but, within a matter of days, such daring had grown general, and the more
sturdy of the venturers had moved on to greater things. There is nothing quite so terrifying as
the results of education.
     Having thus successfully advanced to the actual side of the house, these educated youths
then launched upon us an assault of song. I have forgotten the name of their song, but it was
certainly not a classical composition, being distinctly lively in the catchy style of certain popular
ditties. My master was not the only person who was surprised, for I, too, was so much
impressed by the range of talents displayed by these young gentlemen that I found myself
listening to their singing in spite of myself. However, as my readers may already know, it is
perfectly possible to be both impressed and seriously disturbed by the same occurrences.
Indeed, upon reflection, it strikes me as regrettable that, as in the present case, the two
reactions should so often be simultaneously evoked; I have no doubt that my master shared my
sense of regret. Nevertheless, he had no real choice but, on two or three occasions, to come
rushing out of his study and drive them off his property with such stern rebukes as, “This is not
the place for you” and “I’d be obliged if you’d go.”
     Of course, since the offenders are educated gentlemen, they show no disposition to
meekly obey my master’s exhortations; no sooner have they been turned out but back they
come again. And once they’re back they start again on their less than seemly singing
interspersed with loud-voiced chat and banter. What’s more, and of course because they’re
gentlemen, their language differs from that in common use. They use such words as “youse”
and “dunno.” Such words, I understand, were, until the Restoration, part of the professional
vocabulary of footmen, palanquin-carriers, and bathhouse attendants; however, in the present
century, they have become the only style of language deserving study by an educated
gentleman. I’ve heard it said that a similar social climb can be observed in the matter of taking
physical exercise, for physical jerks, once generally scorned as an activity proper only to the
lower classes, are now most warmly smiled upon at the highest levels of society. However, on
the occasion when one of my master’s frantic sallies from his study actually resulted in the
capture of a student skilled in this new language of the gentry, the prisoner, no doubt frightened
into forgetting the subtleties of modern educated speech, offered an explanation for his
intrusion in such extremely vulgar terms as, “Please accept my most sincere apologies, but I
had, Sir, the mistaken impression that this area was the school’s botanical garden.”
      Having subjected his victim to a cautionary lecture, my master turned him loose. Which is a
silly sounding form of words, more suited to the liberation of newly hatched baby turtles, but
nevertheless appropriate in that my master kept a firm grip on his prisoner’s sleeve throughout
the process of his reprehension. Naturally enough, my master confidently expected that the
force of his winged words would be sufficient to halt the nomadic inroads, but, as has been well
known since the earliest days of recorded Chinese history, there is a vast difference between
expectation and reality. In any event, my master’s expectations were quickly proved misplaced.
The young gentlemen now began to enter the open space from their northern side, walk boldly
straight across it, then across our garden, and complete their short cut into the road beyond by
use of our front gate. The sound of its opening naturally led us to expect the pleasure of
visitors, so it was all the more infuriating to, in fact, receive nothing more than the noise of
vulgar laughter from the direction of the paulownias. Things were clearly going from bad to
worse. The effects of education grew daily more apparent until, recognizing that the situation
had gone beyond his own powers of control, my master shut himself up in his study and there
composed a politely worded letter to the headmaster of the Hall asking that a little closer
control be exercised over the high spirits of his students. The headmaster, in similarly courteous
terms, replied with an expression of regret for past intrusions and a plea for a little more
patience pending the construction, for which he had already arranged, of a fence between the
two properties. Shortly thereafter, a few workmen turned up and, in a scant half day, set up
along the borderline a so-called four-eye fence of open-work bamboo approximately three feet
high. My master, poor old duffer, was delighted. Daft as ever, he glowed in the false conviction
that the nomadic raids had now been walled away, but what man in his right mind could
possibly believe that a real change in the behavior of gentlemen can be wrought by the flimsy
magic of a dwarfish bamboo fence?
      One must, of course, recognize that there is a vast fund of pleasure to be drawn from the
provocation of human beings. Even a cat like myself sometimes derives amusement from
teasing my master’s otherwise uninteresting daughters. So it is entirely understandable that the
bright young gentlemen at the Hall should have found it rewarding to tease such a dimwit as my
master. The only person who objects to teasing is, of course, the person teased. Analysis of
the psychology of teasing reveals two major aspects of its successful pursuit. First, the person
or persons teased must never be allowed to remain calm. Secondly, the person or persons
teasing must be stronger than the teasee(s) both in sheer power and in mere number. Only the
other day my master, who had gone off to gawp in some zoo, came home to recount an
incident there which had particularly impressed him. He had, apparently, taken time to watch
some idiotic rumpus between a small dog and a camel.
      The small dog, barking like mad, had scampered like a whirlwind around and around the
camel, while the camel, paying no whit of attention, had simply stood there, stolidly patient
under the burden of its hump. Unable to provoke the slightest stir of interest from the camel, the
little dog had eventually barked itself into a disgusted silence. My master, too dull to see the
relevance of that experience to his own circumstances, had seen the camel’s dull insensitivity as
nothing more than comic; and he laughed a lot as he told his tale. However, that incident does
clearly illustrate one major facet of the business of teasing. No matter how skilled the teaser,
his efforts will be wasted if the teasee happens to be as dull (or as intelligent) as a camel. Of
course, should the victim happen to be as inordinately strong as a lion or a tiger, the teaser will
quickly find himself involved in the yet more total disappointment of being ripped to shreds. But
when the teaser has accurately determined that his victim, however deeply angered, still can do
nothing in effective retaliation, then indeed the joys of provocation can be drawn from a bot-
tomless well.
     Why, one may ask, does teasing offer such endless pleasure? There are several reasons.
First and foremost, it is the most marvelous way for killing time, better for the bored than
counting one’s whiskers. Of all the tribulations in this world, boredom is the one most hard to
bear. I’ve even heard that, long ago, there was a prisoner so crazed by solitary confinement
that he passed his days in drawing triangles, one upon another, all over the walls of his cell. For
unless one does something, indeed anything, to incite a sense of purpose in one’s life, one
cannot go on living.
     Thus, the amusement in teasing derives in no small part from the stir, the stimulus, which it
gives to the teaser. But it is, of course, obvious that it’s worthless as a stimulant unless it
successfully provokes in others a sufficient degree of that irritation, anger, even distress, which
makes the teaser’s life worth living.
     Study of the annals of history discloses that there are two main types of people disposed
to indulge in teasing: those of an utterly bored or witless mind and those who need to prove to
themselves their superiority to others. The first group includes such creatures as those bored
feudal lords who neither understood nor cared about the fellings of other people, a group which
is nowadays best represented by boys so infantile, so mentally stunted, that, while having no
time to think of anything but their own fool pleasures, they have insufficient intelligence to see
how, even in that sub-puerile pursuit, best to employ their vitality.
     The second main group of teasers realizes that one can demonstrate superiority by killing,
hurting, or imprisoning other people, but that such a proof only occurs as a sort of by-product
from situations where the real objective is to hurt, kill, or jail. Consequently, should one wish to
demonstrate superiority without going to the lengths (or running the risks) of inflicting major
damage; the ideal method is by teasing. In practice it is impossible to prove one’s superiority
without inflicting some degree of injury, and the proof has to be practical because no one
derives adequate or pleasurable confidence in his prowess from mere conviction thereof within
the privacy of his own mind. It is of course true that the human creature characteristically prides
itself on its self-reliance.
     However, it would be more exact to say that the creature, knowing it can’t rely upon itself,
would very much like to believe that it could and is consequently never at ease with itself until it
can give a practical demonstration to some other such creature of how much it can rely upon
itself. What’s more, those endowed with the least intelligence and those least sure of
themselves are precisely those who seize upon the slightest opportunity to demonstrate their
entitlement to some sort of certificate of prowess. One can observe the same phenomenon in
the world of judo, whose devotees, every so often, feel the need to heave someone or other
over their buttocks and smack them down on the ground. The least proficient of these
dedicated cross-buttockers wander about their neighborhoods looking for someone, even for
someone not of their quaint fraternity, upon whose weaker person they can demonstrate their
superiority in using their bottoms to sling the upright flat on their backs.
     There are many other considerations which make teasing a popular and admirable activity,
but, since it would take a long time to set them all down here, I will say no more upon the topic.
However, anyone interested in deepening his understanding of this fascinating subject is always
welcome to call upon me, bearing a proper fee in dried bonito, for further instruction.
     Perhaps I might usefully offer the following succinct conclusion based upon my foregoing
remarks, namely, that in my opinion the ideal subjects for teasing are zoo monkeys and school
teachers. It would be disrespectful to compare a school teacher with a monkey in the Asakusa
Zoo, disrespectful, that is, not to monkeys but to teachers. But truths will always come out, and
no one can deny how close the resemblance is. As you know, the Asakusa monkeys are
restricted by link-chain leash-es so that, though they may snarl and screech to their hearts’
content, they cannot scratch a soul. Now, though teachers are not actually kept on chains, they
are very effectively shackled by their salaries. They can be teased in perfect safety. They won’t
resign or use their teeth on their pupils. Had they sufficient spunk to resign, they would not
originally have allowed themselves to sink into the slavery of teaching. My master is a teacher.
Though he does not teach at the Hall, still he is a teacher and just the man for the job:
inoffensive, salary-shackled, a man designed by nature for schoolboys to torment in total
safety. The pupils at the Hall are gentlemanly youths who not only consider it proper to practice
teasing as a part of their rite of passage into the superiority of manhood, but who also believe
that they are by right entitled to be tormentors as a due fruit by their education. Moreover, a
sizable proportion of these lively lads would not know how to occupy their limbs and brains
through the long ten minutes of the morning break if a kindly nature failed to provide them with a
target for persecution. In such circumstances it is as inevitable that my wretched master should
be teased as it is that the yobbos from the Hall should do the teasing. Given that inevitability, it
seems to me quite ludicrous, a new high point in his long ascent to the thin-aired peaks of pure
fatuity, that my master should have allowed himself to be provoked into so much pointless
anger. Nonetheless, I shall now recount in detail how those pupils teased him and with what
boorish folly he responded.
     I assume my readers need no description of a four-eye fence. I, for instance, can move
back and forth through its lattices with such complete freedom that it might as well not be there.
However, the headmaster of the Hall did not have cats in mind when he arranged for the fence
to be erected. His only concern was to provide a fence through which the young gentlemen of
his school could not pass; I must confess that, freely as the winds may move between its
bamboo laths, I see no way in which a man or boy could do the same. Even for such an
accomplished contortionist as Chang Shih-tsun, that Chinese magician who flourished in the
days of the Ch’ing, it would be hard to weasel a way through a wall of apertures each no more
than a tight four inches square. Being thus impenetrable by human beings, it is understandable
that the fence when first erected left my master happy with the thought that he was safe at
last. However, there’s a hole in the logic of my master’s thinking, a hole far bigger than the
squares in the four-eye fence.
     Indeed, the hole’s so vast that it could easily let through even that monster fish which, in
Chinese legend, once swallowed a whole ship. The point is this. My master assumes that a
fence is something not to be crossed, from which follows his second assumption that no
schoolboy worthy of that name would force his way past any fence which, however humble, can
be recognized as indeed a fence and, as such, a clear identifier of a boundary-line. Even if my
master were able to temporarily set aside those two assumptions, he would nevertheless still
calculate that the smallness of the open-work squares provided genuine protec-tion even
against any such improbable youth as might dare to contemplate forcing his way through them.
He all too hastily concluded he was safe simply because it was obvious that not even the
smallest and most determined boy, unless he happened to be a cat, could possibly squeeze
through the fence. But the massive flaw in his analysis lay in the fact that nothing is more easy
than to climb or jump a fence but three feet high. Which, quite apart from the fun of it, also
offers excellent physical exercise.
      From the day following the erection of the fence, the young gentlemen from the Hall began
jumping into the northern portion of the open space with the same regularity as they had
previously just walked across.
      But they no longer advance to their earlier forward positions right in front of our living room
because, if they are now chased, it will take them a little longer to reach the safety of school
land by reason of the new need to get back over the four-eye fence. So they loaf about in the
middle distance where they run no risk whatever of being caught. From his detached room on
the east side of our house my master cannot see what the boys are doing. For that purpose
one must either go out to the garden gate and there look at a right angle into the open space or
else one must go to the inside lavatory and peer out through its little window. From that latter
position my master can very clearly see what is going on, but, however many the intruders upon
his property, nothing can be done to catch them. All he can do is to shout unheeded scoldings
through the window grille. If he tries a sally through the garden gate into enemy-occupied
territory, the sound of his approaching footsteps gives them ample time to scoot away, nimbly
clear the fence, and continue their hooting from the safety of school land. My master’s tactics
of creep-and-rush are much like those adopted by sea-poachers trying to surprise seals as
they bask in the sun. Naturally, my master cannot spend his whole life either peering from the
loo or dashing out through the garden gate in response to every stimulus of sound from the
open space.
      He would have to give up teaching and concentrate on full-time self-employment as a
yobbo-hunter. The weakness of his position is that from his study he can hear, but not see his
enemies, while from the lavatory he has them in plain view but can do nothing more effective
than yell his silly head off. His enemies, full aware of his dilemma, have shaped their strategy to
exploit his difficulties.
      When the young gentlemen are sure that my master is in his study, they set up a racket of
talk so deliberately loud that my master cannot avoid hearing the cracks they make about him.
To salt his mortification, they vary the volume of their comments so that he can never be certain
whether their babble originates from his or their side of the four-eye fence. When my master
makes one of his forays, they either scuttle off or, if they happen already to be in their own
territory, they stare at him with insolent indifference. When my master is lurking in his lavatory—
      I regret, indeed I would normally disparage, this constant use of that somewhat indelicate
word, but in battle reports one is duty-bound to be topographically accurate—his tormentors
loaf about under the paulownias and take pains to draw his attention to their unwelcome
presence. Then, as soon as he starts raving at them through the window-grille, they, cool as
little cucumbers, let the roar of his abuse flow over their heads to disturb the whole
neighborhood with its ugly echos while, utterly unconcerned, they drift away into the home
ground of their Hall. These tactics are reducing my master to a gibbering idiot.
      Sometimes, sure that the little louts are on his property, he dashes out with his walking
stick at the ready, only to find the open space deserted. At other times, confident of their
absence, he nevertheless takes a quick peep from his lavatory window, and there they are, a
loathly gaggle of them, loitering on his land. So he nips around to his garden gate and he
squinnies from the john. He squinnies from the john and he nips around to his garden gate. Over
and over and over again. If you find my account repetitive, the simple reason is that I am
committed to recounting endless repetitions of the same inane and equally pointless alternative
behaviors. My master, worn to a frazzle, is clearly approaching the point of nervous breakdown.
He has become so frenziedly obsessed with his problem that one hardly knows whether he is
still a professional teacher or now regards this crazy oscillation between peep and sally as his
sole true calling. And then, as the tides of his frenzy rose ever closer to the neap of madness,
the following incident occurred.
      Some kind of incident almost always does occur when frenzy, brain-storm, wrong-way-
upness, a rush of blood to the head—call the condition what you will—impairs the human power
to reason clearly. All the authorities, Galen, Paracelsus, even such ancient Chinese quacks as
Pien Ch’üeh, are at one in this prognosis. There does, of course, remain some scope for
debate as to where the “inverse up-rush” actually starts and as to what it is that rushes. The
long outmoded lore of European medicine men held that there are four different liquids, or
humors, washing around in the human body. The first such liquid was that of choler which, when
it rose inversely, produced fury. The second liquid, that of dullness, if inversely risen, brought on
lethargy. The third, the fluid of melancholy, produced, as one might have expected, melancholia.
While the fourth, blood, was responsible for the activity of arms and legs. The progress of
civilization appears, for no discernible reason, to have drained away the fluids of choler,
dullness, and melancholia, so that, as I understand it, nothing now remains to circulate in our
bodies but residual blood. Consequently, if any inverse rising does indeed take place, it must be
a wrong-way-up-ness of the blood. There is, of course, a limit to the amount of blood
containable in the human body and the precise volume varies slightly as between individual
specimens, but, on average, every human being contains some 9.9 liters of the stuff. Now when
that literage rises inversely, the head, beyond which it cannot rise, becomes heated and
inordinately active, whilst the rest of the body, drained of blood, numbs with cold. One may
reasonably compare this process to the happenings in September 1905 when the populace of
Tokyo, dissatisfied with the terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth, took to burning police boxes. On
that occasion all the police conglomerated at headquarters, leaving no single officer out on the
streets or even to defend their various police boxes. That rush to headquarters could well,
medically, be diagnosed as a rush of blood to the head. And in both cases the proper cure is to
re-establish the normal balanced distribution of blood (or of bloody cops) throughout the body
(or body politic). To achieve that balance the blood, inversely risen, must be drawn back down
from the head, and there are various treatments available.
      For instance, I understand that my master’s deceased father was in the habit of wrapping a
cold, wet towel around his head and then toasting his feet on a charcoal foot-warmer; practices
whose efficacy would seem to be well warranted by those passages in that Chinese medical
classic, Some Thoughts on Typhoid Fever, which states that keeping the head cold and the
feet warm ensures good health and guarantees longevity. A towel a day keeps the doctor
away. Another much-favored method of treatment is that in common use among the priesthood.
Indeed, it appears that, when on pilgrimage, wandering Zen priests would invariably pick out a
place to rest or sleep where there was “a tree above and a stone beneath.” That slogan refers
neither to any aesthetic ideal nor to the self-mortifications of penitents but to a particular
technique for reversing rushes of blood to the head, which was first worked out, no doubt in his
early days as a rice-pounding, kitchen scullion, by the Sixth Patriarch of the Zen sect, His
Ineffable Holiness Hui Neng. Test the method for yourself. Sit on a stone and, in the nature of
things, your bottom will grow cold. As the buttocks chill, any heady sensations associated with
risen blood will sink away to nothing. That too, beyond all shadow of doubt, is also in the nature
of things. One marvels, does one not, at the percipience of the Sixth Patriarch.
     Thus, while a number of methods have been devised for cooling down rushes of blood to
the head, I regret to report that, as of the present time, no satisfactory way to incite them has
yet been invented. It is, perhaps, natural that people should generally assume that there’s
nothing to be gained from rushes of blood to the head, but there’s at least one context where
any such sweeping judgement is likely to prove unduly hasty. Indeed, many of those engaged in
the activity I have in mind would swear blind that without such rushes they could not even begin
to pursue their profession. I am speaking of poets. Just as coal is indispensable to a
steamship, so to poets are rushes of blood to the head.
     Bereft of that energy source for so little as one day, poets would debate into mediocrities
capable of nothing but eating and drinking in a lifelong haze of idleness. In sober truth, a rush of
blood to the head is simply an attack of lunacy, but since no professional would care to admit
that he cannot pursue his profession except when in a state of mental derangement, poets,
even amongst themselves, do not call their madness madness. By an arrangement privately
arrived at, a sort of literary conspiracy, they all seek to dazzle the foolish public by describing
their derangement as inspiration. The fact remains that we are speaking of madness.
     Nevertheless, poets do have Plato on their side, for he called their ailment a sacred
madness, a divine afflatus. Even so, and no matter what degree of divinity may really be
involved, people would refuse to regard poetry with any measure of respect if it were openly
identified with lunacy, and I therefore conclude that poets are wise to cling to their inspiration
because, though “inspiration” sounds to me like the name of some newly invented patent
medicine, it remains an all impressive word, one behind which the pottiness of poets can most
splendidly be sheltered. When exotic-sounding delicacies in fact consist of nothing more unusual
than yams, when images of the Goddess of Mercy consist of nothing more than two brief
inches of rotten wood, when game soup specialities are cooked from common crow, when the
best stewed beef in boarding houses is horse flesh in hot water, why should one question the
reality of inspiration? If its reality is, as it must be, madness, at least it quickly spends itself—
lunacy by fits (especially fits) and starts. Indeed it is only because their manic possession is so
signally short lived that poets are not all shut away in the loony bin at Colney Hatch.
     I think it fair to add that these short-term maniacs, these inspired idiots, appear to be
extraordinarily difficult to produce. It is painfully easy to manufacture lifelong loonies, but even
the most artful God seems to have trouble fashioning beings whose manic spells are limited to
those periods during which the lunatic is holding a means to write and is confronted with blank
paper. In any event, God seldom creates such specimens. Consequently, they have to be
manufactured without divine assistance, and all down the ages, scholars have been obliged to
devote as much time and effort to finding the best way to generate the flow of inspiration as
they have to the problems of preventing rushes of blood to the head. One seeker after
inspiration, convinced that the secret of its attainment lay in constipation, assiduously strove for
that prior condition by eating a dozen unripe persimmons every day for fruitless years on end.
Another aspirant to inspiration believed he could achieve his objective by literal hotheadedness
and accordingly spent his days in an iron bathtub, heated from below, consuming enormous
quantities of hot saké. Failing to achieve immediate success, he concluded that the flaw in his
scheme must lie with the bath water, but unfortunately, he died before he could gather sufficient
money to afford the expense of bathing in boiling port. Yet another would-be poet placed his
hopes for an inspiring rush of blood to the head in the long-received concept of acquisition
through imitation. It is an ancient idea that imitation of the conduct of some acknowledged
master will produce in the ape the same mental state as graced the model. According, to this
theory a man who behaves like a drunkard will eventually feel what a drunkard feels, while a
man who squats sufficiently long in the attitudes of a Zen master, enduring the agony while a
joss stick burns itself to nothing, will, somehow or other, experience the master’s experience of
enlightenment. The adoption of that theory of imitation to the search for inspiration led to the
conclusion that, if one imitated the conduct of some literary giant, one would experience the
same rushes of blood to the head as had inspired his literary achievements. I am reliably
advised that Victor Hugo used to think up his finest prose effects while lying on his back in a
sailing boat, from which it would follow that if one can board a yacht, lie on one’s back and
stare at the blue of sky, one may confidently expect an upflow of stupendous prose. Since
Robert Louis Stevenson is said to have written his novels while lying flat on his belly, it should
be possible by worming around on the floor to have one’s brush construct whole archipelagoes
of treasured islands.
     You can deduce, even from the modest number of examples which I’ve cited, that many
persons have devised methods for generating inspiration, but none has so far proved
successful, and current opinion holds that its artificial generation is impossible. Which is, of
course, sad, but nothing can be done about it. However, I am quite certain that, sooner or later,
someone will find a way to produce the divine afflatus on demand and, for the sake of dull
humanity, I sincerely hope that that desirable discovery is not too long delayed.
     I feel that I have spoken at more than sufficient length about rushes of blood to the head,
and I will therefore now revert to my account of the crisis mounting within my master. I must,
however, first observe that any major event is invariably preceded by a series of minor
happenings, tremors and smoke puffs clearly indicative of the coming explosion, and that
throughout the ages, the admirable efforts of a long succession of historians have all been
flawed by their concentration upon major events to the near total disregard of the minor
forewarnings in any developing situation. Thus, in my master’s case, the vehemence of the rush
of blood to his head increased with every minor brush with his tormentors, and that steady rise
in pressure made the eventual eruption entirely pre-dictable. If I am to properly convey the real
extent of my wretched master’s sufferings, if I am to avoid the possibility that my readers
should look down upon his rushes of blood to the head as trifling bubbles popping in his veins, if
the world at large is not to sneer at his conduct as an exaggerated reaction to petty pin-pricks,
surely I must not scamp the ordered details of the development of his frenzy. Indeed, when one
considers what agony is involved in the generation of the most modest inspiration, it would be a
discouragement to many a budding talent if any manifestation of wrong-way-upness should be
disparaged. However, I must confess that the chain of incidents, minor and major, which I am
about to relate reflects no honor upon Mr. Sneaze. Nonetheless, though the incidents
themselves are, by and large, disgraceful, I must make it clear that the frenzy is no whit less
genuine, less pure, than the flow of inspiration in the very greatest of the madmen of the arts.
Since my own old master has nothing else remarkable about him, were I not to laud his frenzy,
I, his life’s recorder, would have nothing much to record.
     Our enemies who swarm all over the Hall of the Descending Cloud have recently invented a
new sort of dumdum bullet which they mercilessly fire into the northern part of the open space
not only during their ten-minute breaks between classes, but also after their school hours end.
This new dumdum is apparently called a ball and it is discharged at the foe by being struck with
an object resembling a bloated pestle or rolling pin. However, powerful as that weapon may be,
the range from its point of discharge in the Hall’s playground to the study where my master is
normally entrenched is too far for him to be in any personal danger. Our enemies are, of
course, fully aware of the range problem and have accordingly developed a tactic which
exploits the limitations of their weapon. I understand that the Japanese triumph at the battle of
Port Arthur was due in no small part to the indirect gunfire of our Navy.
     Correspondingly, even a dumdum struck no further than into the open space must surely
contribute something to the discomforture of my master; especially when, presumably as an
expression of the solidarity of the swarm, every missile is accompanied by a loud and menacing
cry of “Wow” uttered in unison from every hostile throat. You can imagine with what terror my
master is overwhelmed, how pitifully contracted are the blood conduits to his arms and legs,
and how inevitably, under the pressures of agony, all the blood at large within him begins to
flow in the wrong direction upwards to his head. One must concede the artful ingenuity of those
young schemers in the Hall.
     Long ago in Greece there lived a writer named Aeschylus whose head was of the kind
common to all scholars and writers—that is to say, it was bald. If you should wonder why such
persons should all lack head hair, the reason is that scholars and writers are usually poor (and
therefore ill nourished) and that their work is all in the head (so that what little nourishment
reaches their heads is all so rapidly there consumed that only a very small proportion of it
survives to nourish the hair roots in their scalps). Writers and scholars are all characteristically
both under-nourished and bald. It follows that Aeschylus, being a writer, had no hair on his
head. Indeed, he was renowned for his magnificently smooth pate, hairless as a kumquat. One
day, with his usual head (I do not mean to imply that one can change heads as one changes
hats, wearing at will a party head or an everyday head or a Sunday-go-to-meeting head, but
simply that on this occasion the head of Aeschylus was as bald as ever), this famous writer
went out walking in the streets, where he allowed the brilliant Grecian sunshine to be reflected
from his scalp. Which was a very bad mistake. Bright light reflected from a smooth bald head
can be seen from an enormous distance. It is the top of the tallest tree which takes the wind’s
worst force, so the top of earth’s most shining man may well expect attentions no less fierce. In
any event, it then so happened that an eagle with a captured tortoise clutched in its talons
came cruising through the skies directly above the scintillating Aeschylus. Tortoises and turtles
make delicious eating, but even in the days of the early Greeks they had already so far evolved
as to be very hard-shelled creatures; shells so hard, however delicious the meat within, make it
equally hard for meals to be made of tortoises or turtles. It is perfectly true that lobsters grilled
in the shell are a popular dish today, but no one’s ever heard of tortoise stewed in the
carapace, and I doubt if they ever will. Certainly no such item appeared on the menus of
ancient Greece, and that cruising eagle was beginning, somewhat embarrassedly, to wonder
what on earth he should do with his pendant tortoise when his eye was caught by a brilliant
glittering from the distant earth below him.
     “I’ve got it,” thought the eagle. “If I drop this tortoise on that shiny thing, its shell must surely
break, and, once the shell is broken, I can plummet down and gorge to my heart’s content on
the so-unshielded meat.
      Nothing more simple. Here we go!” And, aiming skillfully for the efful-gent center of the
Aeschylean skull, he straightway dropped the tortoise. Unfortunately, both for Aeschylus and for
the disappointed eagle, the skulls of writers are softer than the carapace of a tortoise; so it
was that, with his bright head smashed in smithereens, that luminary of literature came to his
pitiful death.
      My readers may be wondering how this long digression into death from the sky relates to
my master’s troubles, but I have reasonable hope that all in good time the connections will
declare themselves. First, however, I feel bound to comment that I find it hard to determine the
true intent of that eagle. Did he drop the tortoise in full awareness that the shiny object was the
head of a writer, or did he genuinely believe his target was bare rock? Depending on the way in
which one interprets the bird’s intention, one either can or cannot draw a useful parallel
between the eagle and those boy-faced harpies from the Hall. Moreover, any attempt fully to
understand the problem must take due account of a variety of conflicting factors. For instance,
it is a matter of fact that my master is not bald, and consequently, his head, unlike those of
Aeschylus and other distinguished writers and scholars, emits no brilliant light.
      However, he does possess (though it is a pitiably small example) that sine qua non of any
writer or scholar, a study. In addition, though he is normally to be found asleep in front of it, he
does actually spend much of his time with some difficult book propped up before his nose. One
must accordingly regard him as a person of at least the scholarly type. The fact that his head is
not of a scholarly baldness does not necessarily mean that he is unqualified for such nudity: it
could simply be that he is not yet fully unfledged. However, at his present rate of losing his wig,
he can confidently expect to soon be as bald as any coot of a professor. If his depilation is the
battle objective of those hooligans at the Hall, one must acknowledge that they would be acting
shrewdly if they concentrated their dumdum fire on my master’s head. Two weeks of such
bombardment would so terrify the man that his contracted veins would cease to nourish him
properly and his head would quickly come to resemble a kumquat or a kettle or a bright, round,
copper pot. Two further weeks of bombardment and the kumquat would be squashed, the
kettle spring a leak, and the copper pot crack open. Faced with such a battle plan, the only
person who could fail to predict its inevitable success, the only fathead who would soldier on
regardless, would be, of course, my madman of a master.
      There came an afternoon when, taking my usual snooze on the veranda, I dreamt I was a
tiger. “Bring me,” I growl at my master, “buckets brimming with chicken meat,” which he,
crawling toward me in a pleasing tremble of terror, immediately supplied. Waverhouse then
appeared and I promptly snarl, “Get yourself down to the Wild Goose Restaurant, for I want,
and you shall fetch, goose flesh of the best.”
      “Pickled turnip and rice-crackers,” comes the expectable blather of Waverhouse response,
“have a savor strikingly similar to that of the wild goose.”
      Not deigning even to comment on his presumptuous prevarication, I simply open wide my
cavern of a mouth and shake him silly with a single shattering roar.
      Waverhouse turns pale and placatingly continues, “The Wild Goose Restaurant on
Yamashita Street has, I much regret to report, just gone out of business. What other fare, most
honored sir, would you allow me to procure for you?”
      “Shut, is it? Well, in that case I’ll let you off with beef. Don’t just stand there. Be off to
Westbrooks and hurry back here with a pound of the finest roasting beef. Hurry,” I said, “or I’ll
gulp you where you stand.”Waverhouse shoots out of the house at the double, the back of his
gown tucked up into his girdle to free his legs for a truly astonishing turn of speed. My
enormous body sprawled at ease along the veranda, I am lying there waiting for the return of
Waverhouse when, all of a sudden, a hideous shouting fills the house, and, without so much as
a nibble of beef, I was jerked awake from my flesh-delicious dream. For my master, who only a
moment back had been prostrating himself before me in a cringe of juddering terror, came
rocketing out of the lavatory, kicked me aside with a savage toe in the ribs and, before I even
recovered from that shock, had slipped on his outdoor clogs, whizzed out through the garden
gate and was off at his ungainliest gallop toward the Hall of the Descending Cloud. It is
distinctly disconcerting to find oneself so quickly shrunken from a tiger to a cat, but I confess I
was also somewhat tickled by this latest weird development. Indeed, the combination of the
sight of my master’s ferocious countenance with the pain of his vicious kick soon wiped from
my mind all memory of tiger-time.
     My lightheartedness derives from the likelihood that, if my master is, at last, really going
into action, there’ll be some fun when the sparks start flying. So disregarding my aching ribs, I
limp along in his wake and, as I come to the backyard gate, I hear him barking, “Thief!”
     Up ahead, just scrambling over the four-eye fence with his Hall school cap still stuck on his
head, there’s a sturdy lad aged about eighteen or nineteen. As the intruder drops into safety
and scampers off to his base camp in the playground, I sigh that he’s got away, but my master,
encouraged by the success of his shout of “Thief,” shouts it once again and thunders on in hot
pursuit. Which brings him to the fence. If he keeps on going, he too will trespass into thievery
and, in his present transport of frenzy, it looks as though the passion of the chase and his own
Dutch courage may actually carry him up and over the barricades.
     Certainly he shows no sign of wavering as his spindly legs bring him to the point where the
bamboo stakes stand planted on the border. One more climbing step and my normally craven
master will have graduated into villainy. At that moment one of the enemy generals, some
scurvy usher with a droopy thin moustache, moved up to the frontier, where he and my master,
each on his own side of the fence, engaged in the following utterly fatuous parlay.
     “Yes, he is a student of the Hall.”
     “Then, like all good students, he should conduct himself correctly.
     How does he come to be trespassing on someone else’s premises?”
     “He was collecting a ball that had rolled onto your land.”
     “Why, then, did he not simply come and ask my permission to retrieve it?”
     “I will ensure that the boy is reproved.”
     “Well, in that case, all right.”
     The negotiations which I had happily anticipated developing into outright battle thus quickly
petered out in a dull exchange of the prosiest kind of chicken chat. My master’s fire-breathing
threats are mere bravado. When it comes to action, nothing ever happens. It’s not unlike my
own reversion from a dream tiger to an actual cat. In any event, the foregoing happenings
constitute that “minor incident” of which I wished to tell you, and I will now proceed to the tale
of the major incident which followed.
     My master is lying flat on his belly in the living room with the sliding door left open. He is
deep in thought, probably devising ways to defend himself against those hooligans at the Hall
where, it would seem, classes must be in progress because no noise whatsoever is coming
from the playground. Instead, through the unwonted quiet comes a voice, which by its
resonance I immediately recognize as the voice of the enemy general at yesterday’s
conference, delivering a clear and closely reasoned lecture upon ethics.
      “Thus, public morality is so important that you will find it practiced everywhere: in Europe, in
France, in Germany, in England, everywhere.
      Furthermore, everyone in Europe, even the most humble persons, pays deep respect to
this public morality. It is all the more regrettable that we, in Japan, are still unable to match the
civilizations of foreign countries in this matter. Some of you may perhaps think that public
morality is an unimportant concept newly imported from abroad, but if you do so think, you are
mistaken. Our own forebears were proud to be guided by the teachings of Confucius, which in
every context emphasize the importance not only of faithfulness, but of true understanding of
the needs of other beings; it is upon precisely such an understanding that public morality is
founded. Since I am human, there are times when I feel like singing in a loud voice. But if I were
studying, and someone in the next room started singing loudly, I’d find it impossible to
concentrate on my reading. Therefore, even though I would like to refresh my mind by quoting
aloud from some anthology of classical Chinese poetry, I restrain myself from doing so because
I know how infuriating I would find such a disturbance of my own studies. In brief, your own
national tradition of public morality must always be observed and you should never do things
which might be a nuisance to others. . .”
      At that point my master, who had been listening carefully to the lecture, broke into so broad
a grin that I feel I must explain the inwardness of his reaction. A cynical reader might well
suspect some element of sarcasm in my master’s grinning, but the reality is that his nature is
too simple, even too sweet, to accommodate the sour subtleties of doubt. He simply does not
have the brainpower to be bad. He grinned for no more complicated reason than that he was
pleased by what he’d heard, and, in his pitiful simplicity, he genuinely believed that since the
ethics teacher had given such a poignant exhortation to the students, the hail of dumdums
would now cease and he could snooze along forever in the recovered safety of his study. He
need not yet, he reasoned, lose his hair. His frenzies may not instantly be cured, but, with the
passing of the days, their violence will abate. He can dispense with wet towels around his
brows and a charcoal-burner for his feet. And he need not sleep with a tree for his only shelter
and a stone beneath his bum. Cozy in such delusions, of course the fathead grinned. It is in the
not unworthy nature of the man that my master should have taken that lecture seriously.
Indeed, though he lives in the twentieth century, he still quite honestly believes even that debts
should be repaid.
      In due time the school’s class hours must have ended, for the lecture on ethics came to a
sudden stop. I assume all the other classes finished at the same time, for quite suddenly, with
hideous whoops and shouts, some eight hundred young gentlemen came tumbling out of the
building. Buzzing and whirring like a swarm of bees whose hive has been knocked over, they
poured from the windows, doorways, and indeed from every least gap in the fabric of the
school. And it was with that eruption that the major incident began.
      Let me begin with an account of the battle formation of these human bees; should you think
it overblown to use specialized military terms to describe such a piffling business as my
master’s scufflings with mere schoolboys, well, you’d be quite wrong. When ordinary people
think of warfare, their idea of battle is of such bitter encounters as those which took place
during our recent war with Russia at Shaka, Mukden and Port Arthur. Less ordinary persons,
notably those barbarians who have some feel for poetry, associate warfare with particular
colorful incidents or feats of derring-do: with Achilles in his chariot dragging the corpse of
Hector around the walls of Troy, or with Chang Fei of Yen standing alone with his four-yard,
snake-shaped halberd on the Ch’ang-pan Bridge and glaring down the milling hordes of Ts’ao
Ts’ao’s army.
      However, though every man is perfectly entitled to fashion his individual notion of the nature
of warfare, it would be outrageous to lay down that the only real wars are those of the kinds to
which I’ve just referred.
      One would like to think that totally foolish wars only took place in antiquity and that today, in
the capital city of Imperial Japan and during a period of peace, such barbaric behavior were
inconceivable. Even though riots do occasionally occur, there’s no real danger of the disorder
going beyond the burning of a few police boxes. Against that background there can be no doubt
that the battle between Mr. Sneaze, Captain General of the Cave of the Sleeping Dragon, and
the eight hundred stalwart youths from the Hall of the Descending Cloud must be recognized as
one of the most important conflicts fought out in Tokyo since the foundation of that city.
      Tso Shih’s account of the battle of Yen Ling opens with a description of the enemy’s forces
and their disposition; since all subsequent historians of any repute have followed his example, I
see no reason not to begin with a description of the battle formation of the Bees. In the van,
disposed in line close against their own side of the four-eye fence, there is an advance guard of
students whose probable function is to lure my master forward into artillery range. “D’you think
the old nut knows when he’s beaten?” “Too much of a fool.” “Hasn’t the guts to come against
us.”
      “Where’s he skulking now?” “You’d think he had enough of his stinking loo.” “Not him.”
“Maybe he’s stuck there.” “Silly old twerp.” “Let’s try barking.” “Bow-wow-wow.” “Yap-yap-
yap.” “Bow-wow-wow.”These educated observations culminated in a long yowling war cry of
derision from the whole detachment. Stationed slightly apart to the right and rear of the
advance unit in the general direction of the playground, a bat-tery of artillery has taken up a
commanding position on a bump of higher ground. The chief gunner, armed with an enormous
rolling pin, stands facing toward the Dragon’s den; a second officer, with his back to the den,
faces his colleague at a distance at some forty feet; and directly behind the bludgeon-bearer,
similarly facing toward both the den and the second officer, a third artillery man crouches like a
frog. I have been told that persons so aligned are not necessarily preparing for battle and are
probably practicing a game newly imported from America which is called baseball. Being myself
an ignorant creature, I know nothing whatsoever about that game, but it is said to have become
the most popular of all sporting activities in the middle schools, high schools and universities of
modern Japan. America has a peculiar bent for the invention of fantastic things and I suppose it
was only in kindness of heart that she taught Japan a game which can so easily be mistaken
for gunnery and which causes so much annoyance in an otherwise peaceful neighborhood. I
imagine the Americans honestly think their game is no more than that; however, even the most
gamesome game, if it is able to disrupt an entire neighborhood, can hardly avoid being
regarded as bombardment. In my view the lads at the Hall schemed for the results of
bombardment under the guise of good clean fun. The truth is that by the infinite flexibility of
interpretation one can get away with anything.
      Some people perpetrate fraud in the name of charity, others justify their obvious lunacy by
calling it inspiration. Could it not be that others practice warfare in the guise of baseball?
Baseball as I’ve hitherto described it is the normal form of the game, but the variety which I’ll
now describe is nothing less than the gunnery aspects of siege warfare. I shall commence with
an account of the gunnery drill for firing dumdums.
     The second officer in the three-man crew that I’ve already described takes a dumdum in his
right hand and slings it straight at the bludgeoneer. None but the initiated know the precise
contents of the dumdum, so, as a non-professional, I can only say that the missile is round and
hard like a stony dumpling and that its contents are extremely carefully sewn tight within a
leather casing. As I was saying, this dumdum comes whistling through the wind toward the
bludgeoneer who, brandishing his rolling pin, slams the missile back. Every so often there is a
misfire when bludgeon and dumdum fail to connect and the frog-like figure is then supposed to
stop the ball and toss it back for the first officer again to start the firing procedure. However, in
most cases the connection is achieved, and, with a savage cracking sound, the dumdum is
discharged. The force thus generated is truly enormous and the kinetic energy stored in the
missile could easily smash the thin skull of a neurotic dyspetic like my master. The main three-
man gun crew is all that is fundamentally necessary for the weapon to go into action, but the
master gunners are supported by droves of reinforcements who stand around the gunsite and,
whenever the crack of pestle on sturdy dumpling reports a successful firing, burst into a chorus
of raucous shouts and a rapid fire of hand claps.
     “Strike,” they bellow.
     “A real home-slam.”
     “Had enough yet?”
     “We’ve got you licked.”
     “Go, go, go!”
     “Get on back, you fool!”
     Such a tempest of insults to my master would be bad enough, but injury is added to that
offensiveness by the fact that, out of every three struck dumdums, at least one rolls onto the
dragon’s land. And that penetration is not accidental. On the contrary, it is the entire reason for
the use of the baseball weapon. The weapon’s bullets are nowadays manufactured all over the
world, but they still remain extremely expensive, so that even in times of war, their supply is
limited. Normally each artillery unit is provisioned with no more than one or two dumdums, and
they cannot afford to lose their precious missile every time it’s fired.
     These units consequently always include a platoon of ball pickers, whose sole duty is to
retrieve fallen balls. That duty is relatively easy when the dumdums happen to fall in plain view
on accessible ground, but when they land in long grass or on hostile territory, the platoon has
an unen-viable task demanding speed, ingenuity, and often a willingness to face real danger. It
is thus the gunners’ normal tactic to aim the weapon in such a way that its projectile can be
readily recovered, but, in the present context, their usual practice is deliberately reversed. They
are no longer playing a game: they are engaged in warfare. They aim to fire their dumdum into
my master’s property so as to provide an excuse, the need to retrieve it, for crossing the four-
eye fence. The constant irritation of dumdums landing in his property, immediately to be
followed by hordes of howling schoolboys, leaves my master with a hideous choice between
unventable anger and that resignation to fate which is surrender. Under such strain his
baldness, surely, can only be a matter of time.
     Then it was that a particularly well-struck dumdum came whistling over the four-eye fence,
slashed off a few leaves from the lower branches of a paulownia, and, with tremendous noise,
landed full-toss against our inner castle wall; that is to say, against that bamboo fence around
our garden which I use for my exercises. We know from Newton’s First Law of Motion that a
body remains in its state of rest or of uniform motion unless acted upon by some external force.
If the movement of matter were governed only by that law, my master’s skull would at this very
moment be sharing the fate of Aeschylus, so he was fortunate that Newton was kind enough to
save him from such a shattering experience by the establishment of a Second Law to the effect
that change in motion is proportional to, and in the same direction as, the applied force. This,
I’m afraid, is all a bit too difficult to follow, but the fact that the dumdum failed to pierce our
garden fence, failed to rip on through our paper-window, and failed to smash my master’s skull
must, with our deepest gratitude, be attributed to Newton. In next to no time, as was only to be
expected, the intrepid ball pickers were in action on our property. One could hear them
thrashing about with sticks in the clumps of bamboo grass to the accompaniment of such
screeched comment as, “it landed about here” and “rather more to the left.” All enemy
penetrations of the frontier in hot pursuit of their dumdums are conducted with maximum noise,
since to sneak in for a secret retrieval would be to fail in their real mission. It is, of course,
important to recover a costly missile, but it is even more important to tease my master into
frenzy. Thus, on this particular occasion the ball pickers knew perfectly well where to look for
their ball. They’d seen its original line of flight, they’d heard it smack against our garden fence,
and, therefore knowing the point of impact, they also knew precisely where it must have
dropped to the ground; so it need have been no trouble at all to pick it up quietly and to depart
in peace. We are indebted to Leibuiz for the observation that any form of coexistence depends
upon the mainte-nance of formal order. Thus, the letters of the alphabet, like the symbols of a
syllabary, must always, in accordance with his Law of Systematic Order, occur in the same
sequential relationship. Similarly, the relationships established by convention, proverb and
received wisdom should not be disturbed: good luck demands that under a willow tree there
should always be a loach, while a bat and the evening moon are necessarily linked. There is no
such obvious connection between a ball and a fence, but persons who have accustomed
themselves by daily baseball practice to regular inroads into our property do acquire a sense of
order in such a relationship, from which it follows that they always know exactly where to spot
their fallen dumdums. It further follows that, since Leibuiz has told them where to look, their
unwillingness to do so clearly shows that the fuss they make is directed not toward finding their
ball but to provoking my master into warfare.
     Things have now gone so far that even a man as mild and as naturally sluggish as my
master cannot fail to respond to the challenge. Can it only have been yesterday that this
suddenly berserk man of action was grinning so amiably to himself as he eavesdropped upon
ethics? Swept to his feet by pure rage, he ran out roaring from the house, and so savagely
sudden was his counter-attack that he actually took a prisoner. One cannot deny the brilliance,
for my master, of this feat, but a beardless little lad of fourteen, maybe fifteen, summers makes
a captive unbecoming to a fully whiskered man. Unbecoming or not, it was good enough for my
master as, despite its pitiful pleas for mercy and forgiveness, he dragged the wretched child
into his very den and onto the veranda.
     At this point I should perhaps offer some further clarification of the enemy’s tactics. They
had in fact deduced from my master’s ferocious behavior on the previous day that he was now
close to the breaking point and that it was a near certainty that today he could easily be
needled into another lunatic charge. If such a sally led to the capture of some laggard senior
boy, there would obviously be trouble. But they calculated that the risk of trouble would be
minimized to virtually nothing if they used as ball pickers only the smallest of their first-and
second-year juniors.
     If my master succeeded in catching such a minnow and then kicked up a whale of a fuss,
he would merely succeed in disgracing himself for childish behavior, and no reflection
whatsoever would be cast upon the honor of the Hall. Such were the calculations of the enemy
and such would be the calculations of any normal person; however their planning failed to take
account of the fact that they were not dealing with an ordinary human being, and they should
have realized from his extraordinary performance yesterday that my master lacks the common
sense to see anything ludicrous in a full grown man pitting himself against some squitty little
schoolboy. A rush of blood to the head will lift a normal person into flights of abnormality and
transmute level headed creatures into raving loonies; so long as a victim of frenzy remains
capable of distinguishing between women, children, packhorse drivers and rickshawmen, his
frenzy remains a paltry possession. True frenzy, the divine afflatus, demands that its possessed
possessor should, like my frenzied master, be capable of capturing alive some snotty, little
schoolchild and of keeping him close as a prisoner of real war. The capture has been made.
     The trembling captive had been ordered forth to pick up balls like a common soldier
ordered into battle by his senior officers, only to be cornered by the inspired battlecraft of a
mad opposing general. Cut off from escape home across the frontier, he is caught and held in
durance vile on the garden veranda of his captor. In such circumstances, my master’s enemies
cannot just sit back and watch their friend’s disgrace. One after another, they come storming
back over the four-eye fence and through the garden gate until some dozen doughties are lined
up in front of my master. Most of them are wearing neither jacket nor vest. One, standing with
his white shirt-sleeves rolled up above his elbows, folds defiant arms. Another carries a worn-
out cotton-flannel shirt slung across one shoulder. In striking contrast, yet another, a right young
dandy, wears a spotless shirt of whitest linen hem-piped in black with its owner’s initials in
tasteful matching black embroidered as large capital letters above his heaving chest. Every
member of the detachment holds himself like a soldier, and, from the tanned darkness of their
sturdy bulge of muscle, one might guess them to have arrived no later than last night from the
rough, warrior-breeding uplands of the Sasayama mountains. It seems a shame to waste such
splendid material on a middle school education. What an asset to the nation they could be as
fishermen or boatmen. They were all barefooted with their trouser ends tucked high, as though
interrupted on their way to fight some fire in the neighborhood. Lined up in front of my master,
they glared at him in silence, and he, equally silent, glared belligerently back. Through what
seemed hours of steadily increasing tension their eyes remained locked and the atmosphere
built up toward a pressure only to be relieved by the letting of blood.
     “Are you,” suddenly snarled my master with truly draconian violence, “also thieves?” His
fury, like a blast of flame, vented itself from nostrils flared back from the sear of passion. The
nose of the lion mask used in lion dances must have been modeled from an angered human
face, for I can think of nowhere else where one could find so vicious an image of the mindless
savagery of anger.
     “No, we are not thieves. We are students of the Hall of the Descending Cloud.”
     “Not just thieves but liars too! How could students of that school you mention break into
someone else’s garden without permission?”
     “But you can see the school badge on the caps we’re wearing.”
     “Those could be stolen, too. If you are what you claim to be, explain how pupils at such a
respectable school could be such thieves, such liars, such disgusting trespassers?”
     “We only came to get our ball.”
     “Why did you allow the ball to come upon my property?”
     “It just did.”
     “What a disgraceful lot you are.”
     “We shall be more careful in future. Please forgive us this time.”
     “Why on earth should I forgive a gang of young hooligans, all complete strangers, who
come rampaging over fences to muck about on my property?”
     “But we really are students of the Hall.”
     “If you are indeed students, in what grade are you?”
     “The third year.”
     “Are you certain of that?”
     “Yes.”
     My master turned his head toward the house and shouted for the maid, and almost
immediately, with a questioning, “Yes?” that idiot Osan stuck her head out of the door.
     “Go over to the Hall of the Descending Cloud and fetch someone.”
     “Whom shall I fetch?”
     “Anyone, but get him here.”
     Though O-san acknowledged these instructions, the scene in the garden was so odd, the
meaning of my master’s orders so insufficiently clear, and the general conduct of the matter so
inherently silly that, instead of setting off for the school, she simply stood there with a half-
baked grin on her face.
     We must remember, however, that my master thinks he is directing a major war operation
in which his inspired genius is in fullest flower. He naturally expects that his own staff should be
flat out in his support and is far from pleased when some menial orderly not only seems
blissfully unaware of the seriousness of warfare but, infinitely worse, reacts to action orders
with a vacuous grin. Inevitably his frenzy mounts.
     “I’m telling you to fetch someone from the Hall, anyone, no matter who. Can’t you
understand? One of the teachers, the school secretary, the headmaster, anybody.”
     “You mean the schoolmaster?” In respect of school matters that oaf O-san knows nothing
of hierarchy and no school title save schoolmaster.
     “Yes, any of the schoolmasters, or the secretary, or the head. Can’t you hear what I’m
saying?”
     “If none of those are there, how about the porter?”
     “Don’t be such a fool. How could a porter cope with serious matters?”
     At this point, O-san, probably thinking there was nothing more she could usefully do on the
veranda, just said, “Right,” and withdrew. Quite plainly she hadn’t the foggiest idea of the
purpose of her mission, and, while I was pondering the likelihood of her returning with the
porter, I was surprised to see the lecturer on ethics come marching in by the front-gate. As
soon as the new arrival had composedly seated himself, my master launched out upon his
pettifogging impeachment.
     “The clepsydera has barely dripped two shining drops since these brute fellows here broke
in upon my land. . .” My master opened his indictment in such archaic phraseology as one hears
at kabuki plays about the forty-seven masterless samurai who attracted so much attention by
their carryings-on in the early days of the eighteenth century, and wound his wailings up with a
modest touch of sarcasm: “. . .as if indeed such persons could possibly be students of your
school.”
      The ethics instructor evinced no obvious signs of surprise. He glanced over his shoulder at
the bravos in the garden and then, returning his eyes to focus on my master, indifferently
answered, “Yes, they are all students from the Hall. We have repeatedly instructed them not to
behave in the manner of which you complain. I deeply regret this occurrence. . . Now, boys, for
what conceivable reason do you even want to go beyond the school fence?”
      Well, students are students, everywhere the same. Confronted with their lecturer on ethics,
they seem to have nothing to say. Silent and huddled together in a corner of the garden, they
stand as though frozen, like flock of sheep trapped by snowfall.
      Self-defeatingly, my master proved unable to hold his tongue. “Since this house stands next
to the school, I realize it’s inevitable that balls from the playground will sometimes roll in here.
But, the boys are really too rowdy. If they must come over the fence, if they only collected their
balls in decent silence and left without disturbing us, then I might be content not to pursue the
matter, but. . .”
      “Quite so. I will most certainly caution them yet again. But you’ll appreciate there are so
many of them sculling about all over the place that it’s difficult for us teachers to. . . Listen, you
lot: you must take far more care to behave properly. If a ball flies into this property, you must
go right around to the front door and seek the master’s permission to retrieve it. Understand?”
He turned again to my master. “It is, good sir, a big school and our numbers give us endless,
endless trouble. Since physical exercise is now an integral part of the educational system, we
can hardly forbid them playing baseball even though we realize that the particular game can so
easily prove a nuisance to your good self. We can thus only entreat you to overlook their
intrusions in a benign awareness that high spirits do sometimes overflow into misconduct. For
our part, we will ensure that they always present themselves at your front entrance and request
your generous permission to enter upon your land and retrieve their balls.”
      “That will be perfectly satisfactory. They may throw in as many balls as they wish. If in
future the boys will present themselves properly at the front door and properly ask permission,
everything will be fine. Perhaps I may now hand these particular miscreants back into your
charge for supervised conduct back to school. I am only sorry that it has proved necessary to
put you personally to the inconvenience of coming over here to cope with this business.” As
always, my master, though he went up with the dash and sizzle of a rocket, came down like a
dull old stick.
      The teacher of ethics led off his mountain troopers through the front gate, and so this major
incident drooped to its tame conclusion.
      If you laugh at me for calling it a major event, well, you are free to laugh. Should it, for you,
seem trivial, then so indeed it is, but I have been describing what seemed to my master, not
perhaps to anyone else, events of enormous magnitude. Anyone who sneers at him as, at best,
an arrow shot from a possibly once strong bow but now so far gone as to be spent and feeble,
should be reminded that such spent-arrowness is the essence of the man, and, moreover, that
his peculiar character has made him the star figure in a popular comic novel. Those who call
him a fool for wasting his days in crazy quarrels with the younger kinds of teenage schoolboys
command my immediate assent, for he is undoubtedly a fool. Which, of course, is why certain
critics have said that my master has not yet grown out of his babyhood.
      Having now described the minor and major events in my master’s war with the Hall, I shall
close that history with an account of their aftermath. Some of my readers may choose to
believe that I’m having them on with a history of pure balderdash but, I do assure you, no cat,
and least of all myself, would be so irresponsible. Every single letter, every single word that I
set down implies and reflects a cosmic philoso-phy and, as these letters and words cohere into
sentences and paragraphs, they become a coordinated whole, clear and consistent, with
beginnings and ends skillfully designed to correspond and, by that correspondence, to provide
an overall world view of the condition of all creation. Thus, these close written pages, which the
more superficial minds amongst you have seen as nothing better than a tiresome spate of trivial
chit-chat, shall suddenly reveal themselves as containing weighty wisdom, edifying homilies,
guidance for you all. I would therefore be obliged if you would have the courtesy to sit up
straight, stop lolling about like so many sloppy sacks, and, instead of skimming through my text,
study it with close attention. May I remind you that Liu Tsung-yüan thought it proper to actually
lave his hands with rose-water before touching the paper lucky enough to carry the prose of his
fellow poet and fellow scholar, Han T’ni-chih. The prose which I have written deserves a
treatment no less punctiliously respectful. You should not disgrace yourselves by reading it in
some old dog-eared copy of a magazine filched or borrowed from a friend. Have at least the
grace to buy a copy of the magazine with your own money. As I indicated at the beginning of
this well-constructed paragraph, I am about to describe an aftermath.
     If you think an aftermath could not possibly be interesting and consequently propose to skip
reading it, you will most bitterly regret your decision. You simply must read on to the end.
     On the day following the major showdown I took myself off for a walk. I had barely set out
when, on the corner across from my master’s house where a side street joins the road, whom
should I see but Goldfield and his toady Suzuki engaged in earnest conversation.
     Lickspittle Suzuki had in fact just left the Goldfield mansion after some obsequious visit
there, when its ‘flat-faced’ owner, homebound in his rickshaw, stopped to speak with him.
Though I have lately come to find old Goldfield’s household something of a bore and have
therefore discontinued calling there, the sight of the old rogue himself stirred in my heart an odd
warmth toward him. I even feel sufficient interest in Suzuki, whom I haven’t seen for several
weeks, to sidle across for a closer look; it was thus natural that, as I drifted toward them, their
conversation should fall upon my ears. It’s not my fault, but theirs, if in a public place I happen
to hear their talk. Goldfield, a man whose broad concept of decency permits him to hire marks
to spy upon my master, would, I feel quite sure, extend his sympathetic understanding to any
chance coincidence of presence which narrower minds might consider common eavesdropping.
I’d be disappointed if he displayed such lack of balance as to cut up rough. In any event, I
heard their conversation—
     not, I repeat, of my own will or by my own scheming, simply because their talking was
rammed into my ears.
     “I’ve just been to your house. How fortunate to have met you here.”
     Suzuki performs his usual series of overhumble bows.
     “Fortunate indeed. As a matter of fact, I’ve been wanting to see you.”
     “Have you, Sir? How lucky then. Is there anything I can do for you?”
     “Well, nothing serious. Quite unimportant really. But it’s something only you could do.”
     “You may be assured that anything I can do, most happily I will. What have you in mind?”
     “Well now. . .” grunted Goldfield as he searched for the right words.
     “If you prefer, I could come back any time which happens to suit you.
     Would you care to suggest a time?”
     “No, no, it’s not all that important. Indeed, I might as well tell you now.”
     “Please don’t hesitate.”
     “That crazy fellow, that friend of yours. . . what’s his name now. . .
     Sneaze I think it was. . .”
     “Oh, him. What’s Sneaze been up to now?”
     “Nothing really, but I’ve not entirely gotten over that last annoying business. It’s left a nasty
taste in my mouth.”
     “I quite understand. Vainglory such as his is positively sickening. He should see himself and
his social status realistically; but no, stupid and stuck-up, he carries on like the lord of all
creation.”
     “That’s just it. His insolent disparagement of the business community gets my goat. All that
rant about never bowing to the might of money.
     So I thought I’d let him see what a businessman can do. For quite some time now I’ve been
putting spokes in his wagon, modest irritations involving no more than modest expenditure, but
the man’s incredibly stubborn and I find myself stumped by his sheer block-headedness. He
can’t, apparently, grasp that he’s being got at.”
     “The trouble is that he has no real understanding of profit and loss.
     He is incapable of appreciating, let alone weighing, the balance of his own advantage and
disadvantage. So he goes his own mad road, feeble but persistent in resisting redirection,
totally oblivious to his own best interest. He’s always been like that. A hopeless case.”
     Goldfield burst into genuine laughter at the portrait drawn by Suzuki of a character so
ludicrous to them both that cachinnation was their only possible reaction. “You’ve hit the nail on
the head. I’ve tried all sorts of tricks to shake him up. Knowing the level of his intelligence, I’ve
even hired schoolkids to play him up with pranks.”
     “That was a bright idea! Did it work?”
     “I think it’s working. Certainly it’s put him under strain, and I fancy it’s now only a matter of
time before he cracks under the pressure.”
     “Under sheer weight of numbers! How clever you are.”
     “Yes, I think that he’s beginning to feel the effects of his singularity.
     Anyway, he’s pretty weakened and I want you to go along and see how he is.”
     “Gladly. I’ll call on him right away and let you have a report on my way back. This should be
interesting. It must be quite a sight to see that bull-headed fellow down in the dumps.”
     “Very well, then. See you later. I’ll be expecting you.”
     “All right, Sir.”
     Well, well! So here we are again with another pretty plot. The power of a businessman is
indeed formidable. By its frightening force my clink-er of a master has been set afire with
frenzy; his thatch of hair is well on its agonized way to becoming a skating rink for flies, and his
skull can soon expect an Aeschylean bashing. Considering how much has been achieved by the
power of a single businessman, I am obliged to conclude that, though I’ll never know why the
earth spins around on its axis, it’s certainly cash that motivates this world. None know better
than businessmen what power money buys. It is by their nod that the sun comes up in the east
and, by their decision, goes down in the west. I have been very slow to learn the divine right of
businessmen, and I attribute my backwardness to the atmosphere, the cultural effluvia from a
poor pigheaded schoolie, in which I have been reared. The time has clearly come when my
dimwitted bigot of a master simply must wake up to the realities of this world. To persevere in
his present attitudes could well prove dangerous; dangerous, even, to that dreary, dull,
dyspeptic life which he so desperately treasures. How, I wonder, will my master cope with the
coming visitation of Suzuki? Believing that the style in which that visitor is received will be an
accurate indicator of the degree to which my master has learnt to recognize and accept the
power of businessmen, I know I must not loiter. Though merely a cat, I accept the imperatives
of loyalty and am worried for my master’s safety. I slink around the nauseating Suzuki and, at a
scamper, got back home before him.
     Suzuki proves as smooth and slippery as ever. No mention of the Goldfields soils his subtle
lips, but he chats away, amused and even amusing, on matters of no importance.
     “You don’t look too well. Is anything wrong?”
     “No, I’m quite well.”
     “But you’re pale. Must take care of yourself. The weather’s not been good. Are you
sleeping all right?”
     “Yes.”
     “Perhaps you have some worry. If there’s anything I can do, just tell me.”
     “Worry? What worry?”
     “Oh, if you’re so lucky as to be quite worry-free, that’s fine. I only spoke of worry in the
hope that I might help. Worry, you know, is the worst of poisons. It’s much more profitable to
live one’s life with gaiety and laughter. You seem to me a bit depressed, gloomy even.”
     “Laughter’s no joke, sometimes positively harmful. Men have died from too much laughter.”
     “Nonsense. Remember the saying that luck arrives through a merry gate.”
     “It sounds to me as though you’ve never heard of Chrysippus. Have you? An ancient Greek
philosopher?”
     “Never heard of him. What did he do?”
     “He died of laughter.”
     “Really? How extraordinary! But that was long ago.”
     “What difference does that make? Chrysippus saw a donkey eating figs from a silver bowl
and thought the sight so funny he laughed and laughed and couldn’t stop laughing. Eventually he
laughed himself to death.”
     “Well, that’s certainly a very funny story, but I’m not suggesting you should laugh your life
away. But laugh a little, moderately, a little more than you do, and you’ll find you feel
wonderful.”
     Suzuki was watching my master through intently narrowed eyes, but his concentration was
broken by the noise of the front gate opening. I thought, with pleased relief that one of my
master’s friends had chosen this happy moment to drop in. But I was wrong.
     “Our ball’s come in. May I go and get it?”
     O-san answered from the kitchen, “Yes, you may,” and the schoolboy pads around to the
back garden.
     Suzuki distinctly puzzled, asks, “What was all that about?”
     “The boys from the school next door have batted one of their balls into my garden.”
     “Schoolboys next door? Do you have schoolboys for neighbors?”
     “There’s a school out back, the Hall of the Descending Cloud.”
     “Oh, I see. A school. It must be very noisy.”
     “You’ve no idea how noisy it is. I can’t even study. If I were the Minister of Education, I’d
order it closed forthwith.”
      Suzuki permitted himself a burst of laughter sufficiently long to increase my master’s
irritation. “My goodness,” he observed when his cackling ceased, “you really are worked up. Do
the schoolboys bother you all that much?”
      “Bother me! They certainly do! They bother me from morning until night.”
      “If you find it all so irritating, why don’t you move away?”
      “You dare suggest that I should move away! What impertinence!”
      “Steady on, now. There’s no point in getting angry with me. Anyway, they’re only little boys.
If I were you, I’d simply disregard them.”
      “Yes, I expect you would; but I wouldn’t. Only yesterday I summoned one of the teachers
here and lodged a formal complaint.”
      “What a lark! He must have been ashamed.”
      “He was.”
      Just then, we heard again a voice and the sound of the front door opening. “Our ball’s
rolled in. May I please go and fetch it.”
      “Golly,” said Suzuki, “not another with another lost ball.”
      “Yes, I’ve agreed that they should come by the front gate.”
      “I see, I see. They do keep coming, don’t they? One after the other!
      I’ve got it. Yes, I see.”
      “What is it that you see?”
      “Oh, I meant I see the reason for this stream of schoolboys coming to collect lost balls,”
      “That’s the sixteenth time today.”
      “Don’t you find it a nuisance? Why don’t you keep them out?”
      “Keep them out? How can I keep them out when their ball keeps flying in? They’d come in
anyway.”
      “Well, if you say you can’t help it, I suppose you can’t. But why get so tense and stiff-
necked about it? A man with jagged edges is permanently handicapped: he can never roll
smoothly along in this rough world. Anything rounded and easy going can easily go anywhere,
but angular things not only find it hard to roll but, when they do roll, get their corners snagged
and chipped and blunted, which hurts. You see, old chap, the world’s not made simply and
solely for you. You can’t always have things your way. In a nutshell, it doesn’t pay to defy the
wealthy. All you’ll achieve are strained nerves, damaged health, and an ill name from everyone.
Whatever you do and however much you suffer, those with money won’t care a damn. All they
have to do is to sit back and hire others to work for them, including whatever dirty work they
happen to want done. It’s obvious that you can’t stand up to people like that. Dogged
adherence to high moral principle is all very well in its way, but it seems to me that the price
you might have to pay, indeed the price you are apparently paying, is a total disruption of both
your private studies and your daily employment. You’ll finish up completely worn out for no gain
whatsoever.”
      “Excuse me, but another ball’s come in. May I go around to the back and get it?”
      “Look,” said Suzuki with a knowing laugh, “here they are again.”
      “The impudent brats,” my master shouted from a face stung red with rage.
      The purpose of his mission now achieved, Suzuki made polite excuses and, as he left the
house, invited my master to call upon him sometime.
      No sooner had Suzuki gone but we had another visitor, the family physician, Dr. Amaki. The
record of history since the most ancient times shows very few persons describing themselves
as frenzied, and it’s obvious that when they can recognize themselves as a bit odd, they’ve
passed the peak of their derangement. My master reached and passed that peak during
yesterday’s major incident, and, though he started off all flame and fury only to settle down in
dust and ashes, the fact remains that he did achieve a settlement. Yesterday evening, as he
ruminated over the business of that busy day, he recognized there had been something odd
about it. Whether the oddness lay with himself or with the inmates of the Hall—that, naturally,
remained in doubt. But there was no doubt at all that something very odd was going on. In the
course of his rumina-tions, he even realized that, despite the constant provocation that having a
middle school for a neighbor must inevitably generate, it was nevertheless a bit peculiar to have
lost his temper, to have been dispossessed of his self-possession, day in day out, for weeks on
end. If the oddity lay in himself something must be done about it. But what, he wondered,
what? In the end he concluded he had no choice but to seek some drug or medicine which
would suppress or tranquilize his irritation at its internal source. Having reasoned thus far, my
master decided that he’d call in Dr. Amaki and ask for a physical checkup. We need not
concern ourselves with the wisdom or folly of that decision, but my master’s determination to
cope with his frenzy once he’d noticed it commands, unquestionably, respect and praise.
     Dr. Amaki is his usual smiling self as he serenely asks, “And how are we today ?” Most
physicians ask that curious question in the plural, and I wouldn’t trust a doctor who didn’t.
     “Doctor, I’m sure my end is near.”
     “What? Nonsense. That’s impossible.”
     “Tell me frankly, do doctors’ medicines ever do one good?”
     Dr. Amaki was naturally taken aback by the form of that question but, being a man of
courteous disposition, he answered gently without showing any annoyance: “Medicines usually
do some good.”
     “Take my stomach trouble for instance. No amount of medicine produces the least
improvement.”
     “That’s not quite true.”
     “No? Do you think my medicine is making me feel better?” He’s off again about his blessed
stomach, inviting external opinions on an internal condition about which his nervous system
sends him regular on-site reports.
     “Well,” says the doctor, “no cure comes in the twinkling of an eye. These things take time.
But you’re already better now than you used to be.”
     “Really? Do you think so?”
     “Are you still easily irritated?”
     “Of course I am. I fly off the handle even in my dreams.”
     “Perhaps you’d better take more exercise.”
     “If I do that, I’ll lose my temper yet more quickly.”
     Dr. Amaki must have felt exasperated, for he said, “Let’s take a look at you,” and began
examining my master. As soon as the examination was over, my master suddenly asked in a
very loud voice, “Doctor, the other day I was reading a book about hypnotism which claimed
that all sorts of ailments, including kleptomania and other strange disorders, respond well to
hypnotic treatment. Do yon think it’s true?”
     “Yes, that treatment has been known to effect cures.”
     “Is it still practiced today?”
     “Yes.”
     “Is it difficult to hypnotize a person?”
     “No, quite easy. I often do it.”
     “What? You do it?”
     “Yes, shall I try it on you? Anyone can be hypnotized, at least in theory. Would you like me
to try?”
     “Very interesting! Yes, please do try. I’ve always wanted to be hypnotized, but I wouldn’t
care to remain in a permanent trance, never to wake up.”
     “You needn’t worry about that. Right then, shall we start?”
     Knowing my master, I was surprised at the speed with which he had agreed to this
somewhat unusual form of treatment. I’ve never seen a hypnotist in action, so, thrilled by this
exciting chance to witness a wonder for myself, I settled to watch from a corner of the room.
Dr. Amaki began by stroking my master’s upper eyelids in a downward direction.
     Though my master kept his eyes shut tight, the doctor continued his downward stroking as
though endeavoring to close the lids. After a while, the doctor asks, “As I stroke your eyelids
down, like this, you feel the eyes are getting heavy, don’t you?”
     “True, they are becoming heavy,” answers my master.
     The doctor continues stroking and stroking, and eventually says,
     “Heavier and heavier, your eyes feel heavier and heavier, you feel that heaviness, don’t
you?”
     My master, no doubt feeling just as the doctor suggests, is silent. The stroking continues
for a further three or four minutes, and then the doctor murmurs, “Now you can’t open your
eyes.”
     My wretched master! Blinded by his own physician!
     “You mean my eyes won’t open.”
     “That’s right. You can’t open them.”
     My master, his eyes closed, makes no reply. And I watch this fearful scene in the
compassionate conviction that he has now become blind.
     After a while the doctor says, “Just try to open them—I bet you can’t.”
     “No,” replies my master. No sooner had he spoken than both his eyes pop open, and, with
a happy smirk, he comments, “You didn’t do me, did you?”
     “No,” says Dr. Amaki, laughing in reply, “it seems I couldn’t.” So the experiment with
hypnotic healing proved a flop, and Dr. Amaki left on some other mission of medical mercy.
     Soon another visitor arrived. Since my master has very few friends, it’s almost unbelievable
that so many of those he has should choose to call today: indeed, I’ve never known such
numbers visit in the space of a single day. Still, there it is. The visitors did come, and this
particular visitor was a very rare specimen. I hasten to clarify that I shall be writing about him at
some length not because of his rarity but because he has a significant part to play in that
promised aftermath which I am still in process of describing. I do not know the man’s name, but
he looks about forty and sports a smart goatee on his long face. Just as I think of Waverhouse
as an aesthete, I see this new arrival as a philosopher. It’s not that he’s laid any kind of claim to
philosophic status or blown his own trumpet in the Waverhouse style, but simply that, as he
talks to my master, he looks to me as a philosopher should look. I deduce that he must be
another of my master’s school mates, for they speak to each other in the familiar manner of
very close old friends.
     “You mentioned Waverhouse. Now there’s an extraordinary man, as light and flossy as
goldfish food floating around on a pond. Don’t you agree? Someone was telling me that only the
other day he went out walking with a friend and, as they passed the gates of some peer or
other, no one of course whom Waverhouse had ever met, he dragged his companion right into
the house on the grounds that it would be pleasant to call on the owner and take a dish of tea.
He really is the giddy limit!”
      “And what happened?”
      “I didn’t bother to find out. Something eccentric, I’ve no doubt. The man was born that way,
not a thought in his head; unadulterated goldfish food. And Suzuki? You see him here? Well,
well. That one’s clever all right, but not a man of the mind, not the kind I’d have thought you’d
care to have around. He’s the type to whom money and a gold watch seem to gravitate.
Worldly wise but ultimately worthless. A shallow man, and restless. He’s always talking about
the importance of smooth-ness, of doing things smoothly, smoothing one’s way through life. But
he understands nothing. Nothing at all. Not even the meaning of smooth-ness. If Waverhouse is
goldfish food, Suzuki’s common jelly paste: a thing unpleasantly smooth which shakes and
trembles, a thing fit only to be strung on straw, available for sale to any passerby.”
      My master seems to be much impressed by this flow of denigrating simile for, which he
rarely does, he broke into hearty laughter and enquires, “That’s Waverhouse and Suzuki. Now
what about you?”
      “Me? Well, maybe I’m a yam—long in shape and buried in mud.”
      “At least you seem carefree, always so self-controlled and self-composed. How I envy
you.”
      “But I’m much the same as anyone else. There’s nothing about me particularly to be envied.
Still, I have the luck not to envy anyone.
      Which is just about the only good thing about me.”
      “Financially, are you now well off?”
      “No, the same as ever. Little enough, but just sufficient to eat, so there’s nothing to worry
about.”
      “Myself, I feel so deeply discontented that I’m always losing my temper. I grouse and
grumble and hardly anything else.”
      “There’s nothing wrong with grumbling. When you feel like grumbling, grumble away. At
least it brings one interim relief. You see, everyone is different. You can’t refashion others to be
like you. Consider chopsticks and bread: you’ve got to hold chopsticks as everyone does or
you’ll find it hard to eat rice; however, bread can be cut, and is best cut, in accordance with
your own particular liking. A suit made by a good tailor fits like a glove from the moment you put
it on, but something run up by a shoddy craftsman takes years of tiresome wearing before it
adjusts itself to your own particular bone structure. If competent parents produced children all
neatly shaped to fit the ways of our present world, all would be happily well. But if you have the
misfortune to be born bungled, your only choice is either to suffer as a misfit or to hang on
grimly until the world so changes its shape as to suit yours.”
      “I see no prospect that I shall ever fit in. It’s a depressing prospect.”
      “If one forces one’s way into a suit too small for one’s body, of course one tears the
stitchings, by which I mean that persons violently ill suited to the world they seek to inhabit are
those who pick quarrels, commit suicide, even incite real riots. But you, to be frank, are merely
discontented. You’re not going to do yourself in and you’re not a natural brawler. You could be a
lot worse off than you are.”
     “On the contrary, I find I’m picking quarrels morning, noon, and night. When I lack a subject
on whom to vent my spleen, I live in a constant fume of anger. Even such undirected ire
amounts to brawling, doesn’t it?”
     “I see, you brawl with yourself. Interesting. But what’s wrong with that? Brawl away to your
heart’s content.”
     “But I’ve grown bored with brawling.”
     “Then just stop it.”
     “I understand what you’re driving at, but whatever you may say, one cannot do what one
likes with one’s own mind.”
     “My point is that one can. But leaving that aside, what do you think is the root cause of your
self-wounding discontent?”
     In response to that sympathetic invitation, my master poured out before his friend the long
sad catalogue of his woes and grievances.
     Beginning with an account of his war with the schoolboys, he proceeded to list, in manic
detail and a neatly ordered, reverse chronology, every single fretfulness, right back to the days
of the terracotta badger, Savage Tea, and his petty provocations by conniving colleagues on
the staff of his own school.
     The visiting philosopher listened in complete silence, but, allowing a long pause after Mr.
Sneaze had finished his jeremiad to add its weight to his response, offered the following
sagacities. “You should pay no regard whatsoever to the things said by your staff colleagues,
which were anyway all complete rubbish. The schoolkids from the Hall are not to be taken
seriously, grubby little vermin, existences not worthy even to be noticed by a man at your level
of intellectual attainment. What?
     You insist that they disturb you? Tell me then, have your demeaning counter-activities, even
your formal complaint, even that so-called settlement of the matter led to any lessening of
disturbance? In all such matters I believe that the ways of our ancestors are wiser and much
more effective than the ways of Europe, that so-called positivism which has lately attracted so
much faddish attention. The main snag with positivism is that it acknowledges no limits.
However long you may persist in positive action, the craving for ultimate satisfaction remains
unsatisfied, the quest for the ideal eternally unrealized. You see those cypresses over there?
Let us suppose you decide that they obstruct your view and you clear them away. Then you’ll
find the boarding house behind them has become a new interruption of your view. When you’ve
eliminated the boarding house, the next building beyond begins to niggle you. There’s no end to
your search for a perfect view, and your ultimate dissatisfaction is the fate implicit in the
European hankering for incessant progress toward an imagined ideal. Nobody at all, not even
Alexander the Great or Napoleon, has ever felt satisfied with his con-quests. Take a more
homespun case. You meet a man, you take a scunner to him, you get into a quarrel, you fail to
squash him, you take him to court, you win your case: but if you imagine that that’s an end to
the matter, you’re most lamentably mistaken. For the real issue, the problem in your mind,
remains unsettled, however hard you wrestle it around, until your dying day. The same truth
applies in every context you may care to posit. You happen, perhaps, to live under an oligarchic
government which you dislike so much that you replace it with a parlia-mentary democracy, but,
finding you’ve only hopped out of a frying pan into a fire, you run the risks of civil commotion
merely to find another, no less searing, form of government. Or you find a river troublesome, so
you bridge it; you are blocked by a mountain, so you tunnel through; it’s a bore to walk or ride,
so you build a railway. On and on it goes, with no solution solving the real problem of a
positivist’s dissatisfaction.
     Surely it’s obvious that no human individual can ever have the whole of his heart’s desire.
The progressive positivism of Western civilization has certainly produced some notable results,
but, in the end, it is no more than a civilization of the inherently dissatisfied, a culture for
unhappy peoples. The traditional civilization of Japan does not look for satisfaction by some
change in the condition of others but in that of the self. The main difference between the West
and Japan is that the latter civilization has developed on the basic assumption that one’s
external environment cannot be significantly changed. If father and son cannot get along
together, Westerners seek to establish domestic peace and quiet by changing the parent-child
relationship, whereas we in Japan accept that relationship as immutable and strive, within that
fixed relationship, to find a workable pattern for the restoration of domestic harmony. We take
the same attitude toward any difficulties that may arise in such other fixed relationships as
those between husband and wife, between master and servant, between the merchant and the
warrior classes. We hold our attitude to be consonant with, indeed a reflection of, nature itself.
If some mountain range blocks our free passage to a neighboring country, we do not seek to
flatten the mountain, to restructure the natural order. Instead we work out some arrangement
under which the need to visit that neighboring country no longer arises.
     “This method of fostering happiness, whereunder a man becomes perfectly content not to
cross mountains, is perhaps best understood by Confucianists and Buddhists of the Zen sects.
Nobody, however mighty, can do as he likes with the world. None can stop the sun from setting,
none reverse the flow of rivers. But any man is able to do as he likes with his own mind. Thus, if
you are prepared to undergo the disciplines that lead to control of the mind, indeed to its
ultimate liberation, you would never even hear the racket kicked up by those graceless imps at
the Hall; you would care no whit to be called a terracotta badger; and, knowing your fellow
teachers for mere fools, you would smile your disconcern upon their pitiful pavinities. As an
example of the efficacy of the course of conduct I suggest, may I remind you of the story of the
Zen priest Sogan who, in the turbulent times of thirteenth-century China, was threatened with
decapitation by some berserk Mongol swordsman.
     Sitting unmoved in the posture of meditation, Sogan spoke, extempore, this verse which, in
my opinion, can never be too often quoted.

    Though, like a lightning flash, some sword
    May lop my head, it were as though
    Spring winds were slashed. One is not awed
    By threats of such a blowless blow.



    “As you will recall, the Mongol swordsman was so discountenanced by that calm
asservation of the power of Mind, of the life no killing sword can kill, that he simply ran away.
Perhaps, after years of the hard-est training of the mind, we, too, might reach that ultimate
passivity where, with the same empowered disconcern so spiritedly shown by Sogan, we too
might understand how, like a flash of lightning, the sword cuts through the breeze of spring. I do
not pretend yet to understand anything so difficult, but of this I’m certain: that it is dangerously
mistaken to place your entire trust in Western positivism. Your own case proves my point.
However positively you struggle, you can’t stop the schoolboys teasing you. Of course, if you
had the power to close the school or could prove such serious wrong doing as would merit
police attention, things might be different. But things are not that different and, as things
actually are, you have no chance, however positivist your actions, of coming out on top. Any
positivist approach to your problem involves the question, and the power, of money; it also
involves the fact that you are in a minority of one against heavy odds. In brief, if you continue to
behave as a Westerner would, you’ll be forced to knuckle under to the rich man and, by sheer
weight of their numbers, to be humiliated by the little boys. The basic reason for your baleful
discontent lies in the fact that you are a man of no wealth seeking, all on your own, to pursue a
quarrel on positivist lines. There,” he concluded his lengthy dissertation, “you have it in a
nutshell. Do you understand what I’ve been saying?”
     My master, who had listened in attentive silence, said neither that he understood nor that
he didn’t. But after this extraordinary visitor had taken his leave, my master retired to sit in his
study where, without even opening a book, he seemed to be lost in thought. Suzuki had
preached that the wise man goes with the tide and always truckles to the wealthy.
     Dr. Amaki had given his professional opinion that jangled nerves may be steadied by
hypnotism. And our last visitor had made it very clear that in his remarkable view that a man
can only attain to peace of mind by training himself to be passive. It remains for my master to
decide which course of action or inaction he wishes to follow. But one thing’s certain: he cannot
go on as he is, and something must be done.
                                                II



          Y MASTER is pockmarked. Though I hear that pockmarked faces were well regarded

M         in the days before the restoration of the Emperor, in these enlightened times of the
          Anglo-Japanese Alliance, such cratered features look distinctly out of date. The
          decline of the pockmark began precisely when the birthrate started to climb, so one
may confidently expect that it will soon become extinct. This conclusion is an inescapable
deduction from medical statistics; these, being thus scientifically established, even a cat, a
creature as penetrating critical as myself, would not dare cast doubt upon it. I cannot, offhand,
quote statistics of the current incidence of pockmarks among the population of the world, but in
my own district and among my many associates, no single cat and only one human being is so
grievously afflicted. That human oddity is, I am deeply sorry to say, my poor, old, pitted master.
     Every time I catch sight of it, I am moved by that pot-holed visage to reflect upon the dire ill
luck which brought my master to live and breathe the air of this twentieth century through a face
so anachronistic. Once upon a long time back, he might have made a brave showing of his
disastrous dimples. But in these present times when, by virtue of the vaccination laws of 1870,
all pockmarks have been ordered into reservations on the upper arms, the determined squatting
of such sunken-nesses on the wan wastes of his cheeks and on the very tip of his nose, while
perhaps admirable for their resistance to the drifts of change, is in fact a slur upon the honor of
all pockmarks. I think it would be best if my master just got rid of them as quickly as he can. It
seems to me that those pockmarks must feel lonely. Or could it be that they crowd together in
a clutter on his face as for some final gathering of doomed clans still driven by a mad ambition
to restore their fallen fortunes to a former state of glory? If that should be the case, one should
not slight these pockmarks. There they are, a rallying of eternal dents, last-ditch indentations
entrenched to block the march of time and rapid change. Such deep redoubts deserve our deep
respect. The only snag is that they are also so deeply dirty.
     Now, there flourished in the days of my master’s childhood a certain noted physician of
Chinese medicine, Asada So-haku, who lived in Ushigome. When that old man went out upon
his rounds, he invariably traveled, very, very slowly, in a palanquin. As soon as he was dead,
and his adopted son had taken over the practice, the palanquin was put away in favor of a
rickshaw. No doubt in time’s due course the adopted son’s adopted son will put away the
invariable herb tea of his predecessors and start prescribing aspirin; however, even in the first
So-haku’s heyday, it was regarded as shabbily old-fashioned to be troudled through the streets
of Tokyo in a palanquin. Only long established ghosts, dead pigs on their way to freight yards,
and, of course, So-haku’s doddering self saw nothing unpresentable about it. I tell you this
because my master’s pockmarks are as datedly unseemly as So-haku’s palanquin. Persons
who clap eyes upon my blighted patron naturally feel a little sorry for him.
     But every day my master, no less obstinate and insensitive than that trundled quack of an
herbalist, serenely saunters off to school, his lone and helpless pockmarks bared to a dumb
struck world, there to instruct his dullard students in the mysteries of the English Reader. And
precisely because he is their teacher, the lessons to be learnt from a now departed era, deeply
graven on his hapless face, are, in addition to his intended instruction, usefully imparted to his
pupils. Again and again, reading from his treasured texts, his mouth transmits the precious truth
that “monkeys have hands,” but all the time his silent skin gives out its clear and frightening
answer to unasked questions about the effect of smallpox on the face. Were men as warningly
disfigured as my master to abandon the teaching profession, students concerned with the
smallpox problem would be obliged to hie themselves off to libraries and museums, there to
expend as much mental energy on visualizing pockmarks as we are forced to expend in our
attempts to visualize the men of ancient Egypt by staring at their mummies. Considered from
this angle, my master’s blemishes, albeit unintentionally, are virtuous in performance.
     However, it was not as an act of virtuous performance that my master plowed his face and
scattered thereupon the tiny seeds of smallpox. It’s barely credible, but the fact is that my
master was actually once vaccinated. Unfortunately, the vaccine planted in his arm contrived, I
know not how, to evade the intended localization and, instead, burst forth in ugly flower all over
his face. Since this apparently happened when, being a child, he had neither the least romantic
inclination nor any consciousness of our present high evaluation of a clear complexion, he
consequently scratched away at his face wherever it felt itchy. Like volcanoes his many boils
erupted and, as their yellow lava trickled down all over his face, the original appearance given
him by his parents was irremediably wrecked. Every now and again my master still assures his
wife that, before that business of the smallpox, he was a striking boy. At times he even boasts
that he was indeed so remarkably beautiful that Europeans were wont to turn around in the
street simply to take a second look at him. It is, of course, quite possible. But, sad to say,
there’s no one who can vouch for it.
     Nevertheless, no matter how virtuous or how pregnant with admon-itory truths a thing may
be, if it is a dirty thing it still remains disgusting. Consequently, from as far back as his memory
can reach, my master has been niggled by his pockmarks and has examined every conceivable
method by which his tangerine appearance might be chamfered down to a texture less
offensive. However, his pockmarks cannot just be garaged out of sight like So-haku’s palanquin.
They manifest themselves, and their blatant self-exposure so weighs upon his mind that, every
time he walks along a street, he carefully counts the number of pockmarked persons he may
be so lucky as to see. His diary logs the details. How many pockmarked persons, male or
female, met that day, the place of the encounter, perhaps the general store at Ogawamachi,
perhaps in Ueno Park. Sometimes he cheats with a specific count of pockmarks, but usually
contents himself with a slight exaggeration of the general intensity of the pocking. Where
pockmarks are concerned, he reckons himself an authority second to none. The subject so
obsesses him that the other day, when one of his friends, just back from foreign travels, called
around to see him, he opened their conversation with the question, “Are there pockmarks to be
seen in Europe?”
     His friend first answered, “Well,” and then, tilting his head, gave himself up to long
consideration before replying, “They are very seldom seen.”
     “Very seldom,” repeated my master in despondent tones, “but,” and a note of hope
strengthened his voicing of the question, “there are, aren’t there, just a few?”
     “If there are, their owners will be either beggars or tramps. I doubt whether any pockmarks
can be found on members of the educated classes,” came the indifferent reply.
     “Really?” said my master. “Then it must be very different from how things are in Japan.”
     Accepting the philosopher’s advice, my master has given up quarreling with those little louts
from Cloud Descending Hall and, since that act of abrogation, has secluded himself in his study
to brood about something else. He may indeed be following the philosopher’s recommenda-tion
that he should sit in silence and by negative activity advance the mental training of his soul;
whatever he’s up to, I’m sure no good can come of encouraging a cabbage, that creature born
to craven passive-ness, to indulge himself in loafing gloomy idleness. I have come to the
conclusion that he’d be far better off if he pawned his English books and took up with some
geisha who might at least teach him how far it is to Tipperary. But bigots such as he would
never listen to a cat’s advice; so I decided to let him stew in his own dull juice and have
accordingly not been near the man for the last six days.
     Today’s the seventh day since I left him stewing. Since Zen practice includes the discipline
of sitting in cross-legged meditation for a week long stretch, a discipline designed to bring
divine enlightenment by sheer determination, I thought it possible that, by now, my master, dead
or alive, might have meditated to some real effect. Accordingly, I slouched my way from the
veranda and, peering in through the entrance to his study, looked for any sign of movement in
the room. The study, a modest area of some hundred square feet, faces south with a big desk
planted in its sunniest spot. “Big” is an understatement, for the desk is truly vast. Six feet long
and nearly four feet wide, it stands proportionately high. Naturally, this mammoth object was
not ready made but, the bespoke handiwork of a neighboring cabinet maker, it was most
curiously required to serve both as a desk and as a bed. Never having discussed the matter
with my master, I cannot possibly tell you how he came to order such an acreage of wood or
why he ever contemplated sleeping on it. It may have been some passing whim which led to
this enormity, the product of that process whereby certain types of lunatic associate two
unassociable ideas. Certainly the association of the concept of a desk with the concept of a
bed is genuinely remarkable. The trouble is that, for all its striking remarkability, the thing is
virtually useless. Some time ago I happened to be watching while my master lay at snooze
upon this ludicrous contraption. As I watched, he turned in his sleep, tumbled off and rolled out
onto the veranda. Since that day he seems only to have used it as a desk.
     In front of the desk lies a skimpy cushion whose cover of pure wool muslin is decorated
with three or four small holes, all in one area, burnt there by his cigarettes. The cotton stuffing
leaking through these holes looks distinctly grimed. The man so ceremoniously sitting on this
cushion, with his back and foot soles turned toward us, is, of course, my master. His sash is
knotted just above his bottom, and the two sash ends of some grubby gray material dangle
down limply against his staring soles.
     Only the other day he gave me a savage smack just because I tried to play with those
dangling ends. Those ends are ends strictly not to be touched.
     He seemed still to be lost in meditation, and, as I moved to look beyond his shoulder, I
recalled the saying that pointless pondering is a waste of time. I was accordingly surprised to
see something gleaming strangely on his desk. In spite of myself I blinked and blinked
again.Very strange it was, indeed a thing to blink at. Withstanding the glare as best I could, I
studied this glittering object and suddenly realized that I was being dazzled by his manipulation
of a mirror on his desk. What on earth, I naturally wondered, is my master doing with a mirror
in the study?
     Mirrors belong in the bathroom. Indeed, it was only this morning that, visiting the bathroom,
I saw this mirror there. My powers of recognition are, of course, remarkable; I hardly needed
to exercise them, for the bathroom mirror is the only one in the house. My master uses it every
morning when, having washed his face, he proceeds to comb a parting into his hair. My readers
may well wonder that a man of my master’s character should bother to part his hair but, though
he is indeed bone-idle about all other aspects of personal grooming, he really does take trouble
with his hair. Never since I joined this household, not even in the broiling beat of summer, have I
seen my master’s hair cropped close against his skull. Invariably, his hair is long, three inches
long, carefully parted on the left with an inappropriately cocky quiff turned up in a ducktail on
the right side of his scalp. This hairstyle may, of course, be nothing more than another symptom
of mental disease. However, though this flash coiffure hardly accords with the antique dignity of
his desk, it harms nobody and no one ever carps about it. Leaving aside all further discussion of
the weird modernity of his parting, one may more usefully turn to consider the reason for his
bizarre behavior. The fact is that his pockmarks do not merely pit his open face but, ever since
early childhood, have extended their erosions right up over his scalp.
     Consequently, if he cut his hair like a normal man to a mere half inch or less, dozens and
dozens of pockmarks would then be visible among the roots of his crop. No matter how hard he
brushed or smoothed a close-cut head of hair, the spotty dots of his pockmarks would still
shine whitely through. The effect could well be quite poetic, like a swarm of glow worms in a
stubble field, but certainly his wife would not appreciate the spectacle. With his hair long, his
scalp could be inalveolate. Why then should he go out of his way to expose his pitiable
deformity? Indeed, he would, if he could, grow whiskers all over his face. Would it not then be
crazy to spend good money on haircuts that can only expose his pitted pate to general derision,
when hair that grows cost-free will hide what best were hid? That, then, is the reason why my
master keeps his hair long. Because it’s long, he must part it. Because he parts it, he must
peer in a mirror and keep that mirror in the bathroom. Hence also why the bathroom mirror is
the only pier glass in the house. How then comes that sole existing mirror, that characteristically
bathroom feature, to be glint-ing about in the study? Unless the glass has sickened into
somnabulism, my master must have brought it there. And if so, why? Could it be that he needs
a mirror as an adjunct to his spiritual training in negative activity? I am led to recall the ancient
story of the scholar who visited a Buddhist priest, far famed for his great virtue and
enlightenment, only to find him sweating away at polishing a tile. “What are you doing?” asked
the scholar. “I’m doing my best to make a mirror.” In some surprise the scholar pointed out that,
though the priest was a man of marvelous parts, no man in the world could ever polish a tile to
be a mirror. “In that case,” said the priest, “I’ll stop the polishing. But,” and he burst out
laughing, “the parallel would seem to be that no man learns enlightenment by scholarly perusal
of whole libraries of books.” It may be that my master has heard some version of this tale
about the uselessness of scholarship and, armed with the bathroom mirror, now seeks
triumphantly to demonstrate that nothingness is all. I watch him cautiously, suddenly conscious
that his mental instability may well be taking a dangerous turn.
     My master, oblivious of my presence and my thinking, continues to stare, transfixedly and
with an air of wild enthusiasm, into our one and only mirror. Actually, a mirror is a sinister thing.
I’m told it takes real courage, alone at night, in a large room lit by a single candle, to stare into
a mirror. Indeed the first time that my master’s eldest daughter shoved a mirror in front of my
face, I was so simultaneously startled and alarmed that I ran around the house three times
without stopping. Even in broad daylight, anyone who stares into a mirror with the fixed
absorption now being displayed by my master will end up terrified of his own reflected face; I
am bound to observe that my master’s face, even at first glance, is not exactly lacking in
immediate sinisterity. I sat and watched. After a while my master began talking to himself.
“Yes,” he said, “I can see that it’s a dirty face.” I must say his acknowledgement of his own
repulsiveness merits praise. Judging by appearances, his behavior is that of a madman, but
what he says rings true. It struck me that if he goes one step further down this thorny path, he
will be horrified by his own ugliness. Unless in his heart of hearts a man knows himself for a
blackguard, he will never be wise in the ways of this world; a man who lacks that wisdom will
never sufficiently rid himself of passion as to attain enlightenment. My master, having come thus
far toward recognizing his intrinsic blackguardism, should now be shuddering back from the
mirror with some cry from the heart such as, “Ah, how terrifying.”
      He has, as you know, said nothing of the sort. Instead, having gotten so far as to admit out
loud the nastiness of his face, he does no more than to start puffing out his cheeks. I cannot tell
why he so ballooned himself. Next, with the palms of both hands, two or three times, he
slapped his bloated chops. Perhaps, I thought, some ritual act of sorcery. And at the moment
of so thinking I had the feeling that, somewhere I had seen that pursy face before. From my
ransacked memory the sudden truth emerged. His is the face of O-san.
      It would, I think, be proper if I here devoted a few lines to describing the face of my
master’s female servant. It is a tumid face, a face like that bulbous lantern made from a dried
and gutted blowfish which someone bought while visiting a fox god’s shrine, and then, when
visiting this house, unloaded on my master. Her face is so malignly puffy that both her eyes are
sunken out of sight. Of course the puffiness of a blowfish is evenly distributed all over its
globular body; in the case of O-san’s mug, the underlying bone-structure is angularly fashioned
so that its overlying puffiness creates the effect of an hexagonal clock far gone in some dread
dropsy. If O-san were to hear these comments, she’d be so actively angered that I deem it
prudent to resume my interrupted account of my seemingly sorcerous master.
      As I have already mentioned, first he blew his cheeks out, then he started slapping them.
That done, he began once more to babble to himself. “When the skin is stretched,” he said,
“one hardly sees the pockmarks.” Next, turning sideways to present his profile to the light, he
pored upon his image in the glass. “This way, very bad. The side light shows them up. It seems
that, after all, they look least there when the light’s from dead in front. But even then,” and he
spoke as if quite genuinely impressed, “they’re still extremely nasty.” He then stretched out his
right hand holding the mirror as far as it would go. He scrutinized the glass. “At a distance, not
so bad. As I thought, it’s the close-up view that’s awful. Still, that’s true of most things. Not,” his
mumblings came out clearly as though he’d lighted upon some marvelous, long hid truth,
      “just of pockmarked faces.” Next, he suddenly laid the mirror, glass upward, flat on the
desk and began contracting his facial muscles so that his brows, his eyebrows, even his very
eyes, all seemed drawn in one wild whorl of wrinkles around the crease where his nose springs
out from his skull. How hideous, I thought. My master, too, seemed shaken by the sight, for he
muttered, “That won’t do,” and ceased his vile contractions. “I wonder,” he went on, lifting the
mirror up to a point but three short inches from his pot-holed skin, “why my face is so
extraordinarily repulsive.” He sounded as though honestly perplexed. With his right index finger
he begins to stroke the wings of his nose. Breaking off, he presses his fingertip hard down on
his blotting pad. The grease appeared as a round blob on the blotter. He has indeed some
charming little ways. Next he raises his nose-greased fingertip and hauls down on his right
lower eyelid daringly to produce a red-fleshed goblin look, an ugly trick which, very
understandably, is commonly described as making a hare’s face. It is not entirely clear whether
he is studying his pockmarks or merely trying to stare his mirror down.
     Let us, however, be generous. He is a quirky man, but at least it seems that in his case
such staring at a bathroom mirror does induce original ideas, even original actions. Nor is that
all. Such quaint behavior could be seen, by well-disposed and drolly natured persons, as the
means by which my master moves, madly gesticulating and with a mirror for companion,
toward a revelation of his inmost nature—toward, in Zen terms, his Original Face. All studies
undertaken by human beings are always studies of themselves. The proper study of mankind is
self.
     The heavens, earth, the mountains and the rivers, sun and moon and stars—they are all no
more than other names for the self. There is nothing a man can study which is not, in the end,
the study of the self. If a man could jump out of his self that self would disappear at the
moment of his jumping. Nor is that all. Only oneself can study one’s self It is totally impossible
for anyone else to do it. Totally impossible, no matter how earnestly one may wish either to
study another or to be studied by another. Which explains why all great men invariably achieve
greatness solely by their own efforts. If it were true that you could learn to understand yourself
by virtue of someone else’s helping effort, then you could, for instance, declare whether some
hunk of meat were tough or tender by getting someone else to eat it for you. But hearing truths
preached in the morning, listening all evening to learned expositions of the Way, reading
scholarly tomes the night long in your study—all these worthy activities are nothing but
disciplines designed to facilitate your perception of your own true self. Yet that true self of
yours cannot conceivably exist in the truth preached at you by some other person, or in the
Way some other man expounds, or in ancient books however heaped upon you. If your own self
exists, it is your personal phantom, a kind of doppelganger. Indeed, it’s often the case that a
phantom has more substance than a soulless person. For if you dog a shadow, one fine day
you may well find its substance. Indeed, as a general rule, shadows adhere to their
substances. If it is as a reflection of such concepts that my master’s toying with the bathroom
mirror should be seen, then he may be someone to be reckoned with. For surely those who
seek the truth in themselves are wiser, better men than such fool scholars whose only claim to
wisdom is that they have gulped down all that Epictetus scribbled on that subject.
     A mirror is a vat for brewing self-conceit, yet, at the same time, a means to neutralize all
vanity. Nothing shows up the absurd pretensions of a show-off more incitingly than a mirror.
Since time began, the pretentious and the vainglorious have gone about the world inflicting
damage both upon themselves and upon others, and the first cause of at least two-thirds of
that injury undoubtedly lay in mirrors. Like that wretched Dr. Guillotin, who unintentionally
caused himself, quite apart from many others, so much painful inconvenience during the French
Revolution by inventing an improved method of decapitation, the man who invented the mirror
must almost certainly have lived to regret it. On the other hand, for persons beginning to sicken
into self-disgust and for persons already feeling spiritually shriveled, there’s nothing quite so
tonic as a good long look in a mirror. For any such observer cannot fail to realize as a
staggering fact the effrontery of his having dared to go about for years with such an appalling
face. The moment of that realization is the most precious moment in any man’s life, and none
looks more exaltedly transfigured than a fool grown self-enlightened to his own intrinsic folly.
     Before this self-enlightened fool all the world’s vainglorious ninnies should, in the deepest
awe, abase themselves. Such ninnies may indeed sneer in contempt at the enlightened one, but
in reality their triumphing contempt is an expression, however unwitting, of an awed submission.
I doubt whether my master has the depth to realize his foolishness by staring into a mirror, but
he is at least capable of acknowledging the ugly truth pox-graven on his phiz. Recognition of the
loathliness of one’s face often proves a first step forward toward realizing the depravity of
one’s soul. My master shows promise. But this glint of wisdom may, of course, be nothing more
than a fleeting consequence of his having been put down in his recent encounter with that Zen-
bent chum of his.
     Musing idly along these lines, I went on watching my master.
     Unaware of my surveillance, he continued happily tugging at his eyelids to produce a series
of increasingly horrible caricatures of his naturally nasty features. “They seem,” he suddenly
said, “distinctly bloodshot.
     Chronic conjunctivitis.” He closed his eyes and thereupon began to frot their reddened lids
with the flank of his index finger. I imagine they must be itching, but eyes already so irksomely
inflamed are hardly likely to be soothed by such vigorous abrasion. If he keeps it up, it won’t be
long before his eyes just decompose like those of a salted bream. After a bit he reopened his
lids and peered back into the mirror. Just as I’d feared, his eyes have all the glassy leadenness
of the winter sky of some northern country. As a matter of fact, whatever the season, his eyes
are never exactly bright or even clear. They are, to coin a term, nubeculoid: so muzzily inchoate
that nothing differentiates their pupils and their whites. Just as his mind is dim and vaporous, so
too his eyes, cloudily unfocused, drift pointlessly around. Some say this eye defect was caused
by infection contracted when still in the womb, others that it is an after effect of his childhood
smallpox. In any event, he was thoroughly dosed as a tot with decoctions of red frogs and of
those insects found on willow trees. Perhaps because such cures are properly intended to
eradicate peevishness in children, the doubtless loving care of his doubtless loving mother
seems to have been wasted upon him, for, to this day, his eyes have remained as swimmingly
vacuous as on the day he was born. My personal conviction is that neither antenatal poisoning
nor infantile smallpox are in any way responsible for his inner blear of eye. That lamentable
condition, the persistent drifting of his gaze, the dark turbidity of his eyeballs, are all no more
than external signs of the darkly turbid content of his mind. Indeed, since he is responsible for
the long, gray drizzle of his own dismal thoughts, he should be chided for their outward
manifestations which occasioned so much needless worry to his innocent mother. Where
there’s a drift of smoke, there you will find a fire. Where there are drifting eyes, there you will
find a half-wit. Since his eyes reflect his mind, which is about as much use as a hole in the
head, I can understand why his goggle eyes, the shape and size of those old-time coins with
holes right through them, are as totally vacuous as they are unsuited to these times.
     My master next began to twirl his moustache. It is, by nature, an unruly growth, each
individual hair sticking out in whatever direction happens to take its surly fancy. Though
individualism is currently very much the fashion, if every moustache hair behaved thus
egotistically, gentlemen so adorned would be sadly inconvenienced. Having given the matter
considerable thought, my master has recently begun trying to train his various tufts into some
sort of general order and, to be fair, he’s had a modest measure of success, for his whiskers
have of late shown signs of acquiring a certain sense of cooperative discipline. Originally, the
growth was a mere haphazard extension of hair through the skin of his upper lip, but now it is
possible for him to claim with pride that he keeps a moustache. All determination is
strengthened by success. And my master, conscious that his moustache has a promising future,
gives it every encouragement, not just in the mornings and at bedtime, but on every possible
occasion. His dearest ambition is to sport twin upturned spikes like those on Kaiser Bill, so,
disregarding the random inclinations of his pores, some pointed sideways, some straight down,
he hauls his tuft growths hideously heavenward. Which must be very painful for those wretched
hairs. Indeed, it’s clear that even my master sometimes finds it painful. But that, of course, is
the essence of training. Willing or not, in pain or not, the tufts are being disciplined to stick
straight up. To any objective observer this drill must seem a silly sort of occupation, but to my
master it makes good sense; one can hardly reproach him when the whole educational system
of this country is similarly designed so that teachers may go about bragging that they can twist
their student’s real characters into upward aspirations as daft as a waxed moustache.
     My master was thus brutally drilling his whiskers when the hexagonal O-san advanced from
the kitchen and, sticking a raw red hand into the study with her customary lack of ceremony,
abruptly stated, “The mail, master.” My master, still holding his moustache uptwisted in his right
hand and the mirror in his left, turned round toward the entrance.
     As soon as O-san, who knows that growth for the ragged flop it is, clapped eyes upon
what looked like two fish snuggled under my master’s nose with their tails frisked up on either
side of it, she threw down some letters and scuttled off back to the kitchen where, her whole
fat body bent across the lid of the rice-cooker, she lay convulsed with laughter.
     My master, nowise perturbed by her performance, put down the mirror with the utmost
composure and gathered up the scattered post.
     The first letter is a printed communication imposingly heavy with formal Chinese characters.
It reads as follows:



    Dear Sir,
       May we offer you the compliments of the season. Please permit us to congratulate
    you upon your present prosperity, and long may it continue. As we are all aware, the
    Russo-Japanese War has ended in our complete and total victory, and peace has been
    restored. Most of our officers and men, loyal, brave, and gallant, are singing victory-
    songs amidst that incessant cheering which signifies the heart-felt joy of all our people. At
    the call to arms, these officers and men, selflessly sacrificing themselves for the public
    good, went forth to endure the broiling heat and the piercing cold in foreign parts
    thousands of miles from home. There, unstintingly, they risked their lives, fighting on our
    behalf. Such faithful devotion to duty must never be forgotten. We should carry a living
    consciousness thereof always, close to our hearts.
       By the end of this month the last of our triumphant troops will have returned.
    Accordingly, our association, which represents this district, proposes to hold, on the 25th
    instant, a major victory celebration honoring the thousand or so officers,
    noncommissioned officers, petty officers, and private soldiers who hail from our district.
    We would also wish to welcome to this occasion all those bereaved families whose dear
    ones fell on the field of battle. We desire thus to express with human warmth our
    sympathy with them in their loss and our sincere gratitude to them for their menfolk’s
    sacrifice and valor.
       It would give our association the greatest pleasure, indeed it would do us credit, if we
    could carry out the proposed ceremony in the knowledge of your approval. We therefore
    sincerely hope you will signify your approval of our proposal by a generous subscription
    to this worthy cause.



The letter is signed by a peer. My master, having read it through in silence, replaces it in the
envelope. He looks quite unconcerned and shows no sign whatsoever of any readiness to
cough up cash. The other day he did actually contribute a few pence for the relief of those
whom the poor crops in the northeast had exposed to famine. But ever since he made that gift
he has bombarded everyone he meets with complaints that the subscription was a robbery. If
he voluntarily subscribed, he can’t possibly call it robbery. It is, indeed, most improper to use a
word with such criminal implications. However, my master really does seem to think he really
was robbed. I consequently think it most unlikely that he will part with his precious money in
response to a mere printed letter, certainly not to a letter so civilly written and unperemptory,
even though the cause is as noble as a victory celebration, and its canvasser as noble as a
nobleman can be. As my master sees it, before honoring the army, he’d like to be honored
himself. After he has been sufficiently honored, he well might honor almost anything; so long as
he continues having to scrape along in penny-pinched obscurity, he seems content to leave the
honoring of armies to peers who can afford it.
    “Oh dear,” he said as he picked up the second envelope, “another printed letter.” He then
began, with steadily growing interest, to read what it said.



         We offer our congratulations that you and your family should be enjoying good
    prosperity at this season of chilly autumn.
         As you are aware, over the past three years the operation of our school has been
    greatly hindered by a few overacquisitive men.
    Indeed at one stage, things looked very serious. However, having realized that all those
    difficulties originated in certain of my own fail-ings, I, your humble servant Shinsaku,
    communed and expostulated most deeply with myself in respect of those regrettable
    deficiencies and, having endured unspeakable self-criticism, hardships, and priva-tions, I
    have at long last found a way unaided to obtain sufficient funds to construct the new
    school building in a style compatible with my own ideals. The fact is that I am about to
    publish a book entitled The Essentials of the Secret Art of Sewing: A Separate Volume.
    This book, which I, your humble servant Shinsaku, have composed at immense trouble, is
    written in strict accordance with that theory and those principles of industrial art which,
    for many years, I have so painfully been studying. I hope that every household will buy a
    copy of this book, the price of which is no more than the actual cost of producing it with
    little or nothing added as profit. For I am convinced that this book will serve to advance
    the art of sewing. At the same time, the modest profits I anticipate from its sale should
    be sufficient to finance the needed extensions to the school buildings.
         Therefore, I should be most grateful and honored if you would, by way of making a
    donation toward the construction expenses of the school house, be so kind as to
    purchase a copy of the aforementioned Essentials of the Secret Art of Sewing, a book
which you could, for instance, advantageously put in the hands of your maidservant. I do
most humbly and sincerely hope you will grant me your support in this matter.
  With the utmost respect and good will, and with nine respectful bows,
Nuida Shinsaku
Principal
Great Japan Women’s High
             Graduate School of Sewing

My master indifferently crumpled this courteous letter into a ball and pitched it lightly into the
waste-paper basket. I am sorry to say that Mr.
    Shinsaku’s nine respectful bows and his many unspeakable hardships all came to nothing.
    My master then took up his third letter. This one gleams with quite extraordinary luster. Its
envelope is brightly colored with red and white stripes and looks as gay as a signboard
advertising boiled sweets. Right in the center of these dazzling slats there is written in a thickly,
flowery calligraphic style, “O Rare Dr. Sneaze! With Deep Respect.” Whatever this envelope
may contain, its externalities are extremely grand.



    Sir,
        If I am to dominate the universe, then I would, in one swift go, swallow up the whole
    world. But if the universe is to rule over me, then I would become no more than a mote of
    dust. Tell me, I entreat you, what is the correct relation between myself and the universe.
        The person who first ate sea slugs deserves respect for his daring. The man who first
    ate blowfish should be honored for his bravery. He who added sea slugs to our diet
    performed a service for the nation comparable to Shinran’s founding of the Pure Land
    sect, and the con-tributor of blowfish may be fairly compared with such a courageous
    religious innovator as the great Priest Nichiren. But you, dear Dr. Sneaze, your
    gastronomic genius stretches no further than to dried gourd shavings dressed with
    vinegared bean-paste. I have yet to meet a man of parts whose prowess was advanced
    by eating dried gourd shavings dressed with vinegared bean-paste.
        Your closest friend might betray you. Your very parents might turn cold toward you.
    Even your own true love might cast you off. No man, naturally, can put his trust in wealth
    or worldly honors. Lands and peerages can vanish in the twinkling of an eye. Even a
    lifetime’s scholarship treasured in one’s head goes moldy in the end. On what, then, Dr.
    Sneaze, do you intend to rely? What is there in the whole, wide universe on which you
    dare depend? God? God is a mere clay figure fabricated in the depths of their despair by
    dreggy persons, by beings themselves so terrified as to be nothing more than stinking
    lumps of shit. Could it be that you claim nevertheless to find some ease of mind by
    putting your trust in objects that you know to be untrustworthy? Ah, what a depth of folly!
    A staggering drunkard, babbling senseless words, totters, however weavingly, straight
    toward his grave. The oil is all used up. As the wick gutters into darkness, so even one’s
    passions die down and are gone. When your destined course is run, what flicker of your
    self will remain or be remembered? Respected sir, had you not better take a sip of tea?
        If you disdain others, you have nothing to fear. Why is it, then, that you, who do
    disdain all others, are nonetheless enraged at the world which disdains you? High-ranking
    and distinguished persons seem to be puffed up by their disdain for people. However, as
    soon as they feel themselves disdained, they flare up in real anger. Let them flare up.
    They are all idiots!
        When due regard is given to other people but those other people do not reciprocate,
    then, instead of just complaining, the discontented are liable, every now and again, to
seek redress of their grievance by some positive action. Such spasmodic action is called
revolution. Revolutions are not the work of mere grumblers, but are the happy handiwork
of high-ranking and distinguished persons who enjoy promoting them.
   Honored sir, there is a great deal of ginseng in Korea. Why, dear Dr. Sneaze, don’t
you give it a try?
    Written from Colney Hatch
      and dispatched with two respectful bows
      by Providence Fair

     The needle-plying Shinsaku had offered nine such bows, but Providence Fair produces only
a measly brace, and, since his letter does not ask for money, he must, to the extent of seven
respectful bobbings, be that much the more arrogant. Still, even though the letter does not
scrounge for cash, its vile construction and indigestible contents make it equally painful to
receive. Were it submitted to a magazine, even the scurviest, it would undoubtedly be rejected,
and I felt consequently sure that my master, who never likes to put the least strain on his gray
matter, would just tear it up. To my immense surprise he reads it over and over again. Perhaps
he cannot credit that a posted letter might actually have no meaning and is determined to
discover what this one seeks to convey. The world is crammed with conundrums, but none of
them are totally meaningless. No matter how incomprehensible a phrase may be, a willing
listener can always wring some kind of message out of it. You can say mankind is stupid or that
mankind is astute: either way, the statement makes some sense. Indeed, one can go much
further. It is not incomprehensible if one says that human beings are dogs or pigs. Nor would it
occasion any surprise if one stated that a mountain was low; or that the universe is small. One
could well get away with claiming that crows are white, that living dolls are dead ugly, even that
my master is a man of worth. It follows that even a letter as weird as Mr. Fair’s could, if one
really bent one’s mind to the effort, be twisted to make sense. And a man like my master, who
has spent his whole life explaining the meanings of English words which he does not
understand, naturally has small difficulty in wrenching meaning out of mumbo-jumbo totally
uninterpretable by anyone else. He is, after all, the very fellow who, when one of his pupils
asked why people still say “Good morning” when the weather happens to be bad, pondered
that knotty problem for seven days at a stretch. I remember, too, that he once devoted three
whole days and three long nights to an attempt at establishing the correct way for a Japanese
to pronounce the name of Columbus. Such a man finds no trouble at all in making free
interpretations of anything he comes across: he could, for instance, interpret a habit of eating
dried gourd shavings dressed with vinegared bean-paste as a sure indicator of inherent ability
to achieve world fame, and with similar ease he could identify ginseng-eaters as the instigators
of revolutions. In any event, it soon became clear that my master, demonstrating yet again that
perspicacity and depth of mind which he once bought to bear on the knotty matter of saying
“Good morning” at times of nasty weather, has penetrated to the inner meanings of the crazy
letter sent him with two respectful bows.
     “This letter,” he breathed in tones of the deepest admiration, “is fraught with profound
significance. Whoever wrote these words is an adept of philosophies. The sweep, the range,
the grasp of the mind behind this letter are truly stupendous.”Which only goes to show how daft
my master is. But, on second thought, perhaps he isn’t quite so stupid at all.
     Habitually he values whatever he does not understand, but he is by no means alone in that
behavior. Something unignorable lurks in whatever passes our understanding, and there is
something inherently noble in that which we cannot measure. For which reason laymen are loud
in their praises of matters they do not understand and scholars lecture unintelligibly on points as
clear as day. This lesson is daily demonstrated in our universities, where incomprehensible
lectures are both deeply respected and popular, while those whose words are easily
understood are shunned as shallow thinkers. My master admired his third letter, not because its
meaning was clear, but precisely because large tracts of it were utterly incomprehensible. He
was touched, I would say, by the total lack of reason for the letter’s sudden irrelevant sallies
into such matters as the first consumption of sea slugs and its description of the-ists as terror-
frantic shit. Thus, as Taoists are most deeply ravished by the most gnomic sayings of Lao-tzu,
as followers of Confucius laud the Book of Changes, and as Zen priests dote on the Collected
Thoughts of Lin Chi, so my master admires that letter because he hasn’t the faintest idea what
it means. Of course, it wouldn’t do not to understand it at all; so, reading its nonsense in
accordance with his gift for free interpretation, he manages to convince himself that he’s
grasped its real intent. Well, it’s always pleasant to admire something incomprehensible when
you think you understand it. So it was with understandable reverence that my master refolded
the florid calligraphy of that precious letter and placed it gently down upon the desk before him.
He sits there, lost in meditation, head bowed and his hands sunk deep within his clothing.
     Suddenly, there came a loud voice from the entrance. “Hello there!
     Can I come in?” It sounds like that of Waverhouse, but most uncharacteristically, it keeps
on asking for admission. My master obviously hears the constant calling, but, keeping his hands
buried in his clothes, makes no move whatsoever. Perhaps he holds it as a principle that the
master of a house should not answer a caller, for in my experience he has never, at least not
from his study, ever cried, “Come in.” The maidservant has just gone out to buy some soap and
Mrs. Sneaze is busy in the lavatory, so that leaves only me to answer the door. But, frankly, I
do not care to.
     The matter was, however, settled when the visitor, grown impatient, stepped up onto the
veranda by the door, walked in uninvited and left the door wide open. In the matter of civilities,
my master and his visitor seem a perfect match. The visitor first went into the living room but,
having fruitlessly opened and shut various of its sliding doors, then marched into the study.
     “Well, really! What on earth are you doing? Don’t you know you’ve got a visitor?”
     “Ah, so it’s you.”
     “Is that all you have to say? You should’ve answered if you were in.
     The house seemed positively deserted.”
     “Well, as it happens, I’ve got something on my mind.”
     “Even so, you could at least have said, ‘Come in.’”
     “I could have.”
     “The same old iron nerves.”
     “The fact is that lately I’ve been concentrating on training my mind.”
     “Fantastic! And what will become of your visitors if your trained mind makes you incapable
of answering the door? I wish you wouldn’t sit there looking so smugly cool. The point is that
I’m not alone today.
     I’ve brought along someone very unusual. Won’t you come out and meet him?”
     “Whom have you brought?”
     “Never mind that. Just come out and meet him. He’s most anxious to meet you.”
     “Who is it?”
     “Never mind who. Just get up. . . There’s a good fellow.”
     My master stood up without removing his hands from his clothing.
     “I’ll bet you’re pulling my leg again,” he grumbled as, passing along the veranda, he walked
into the drawing room with the clear expectation of finding it empty. But there, politely facing the
alcove in the wall, sat an old man whose stiffly upright posture expressed both a natural
courtesy and a certain solemnity of mind. Involuntarily, my master first brought his hands into
view and then immediately sat down with his bottom pushed hard up against the sliding-door.
By this precipitate action my master finished up facing in the same westerly direction as the old
man, so that it was now impossible for them to bow to each other in formal greeting. And the
older generation remains extremely rigid in matters of etiquette.
     “Please be seated there,” said the old man urging my master to take his proper place with
his back to the alcove.
     Up until a few years ago, my master assumed that it did not matter where one sat in a
room; but since the day when someone told him that an alcove is a modified form of that upper
room where envoys of the Shogun were accustomed to seat themselves, he avoids that place
like the plague. Consequently, and especially now that an unfamiliar elderly person is present,
nothing will induce him to sit down in the place of honor. Indeed, he cannot even manage a
proper greeting. He just bowed once and then exactly repeated the words used by his visitor.
“Please be seated there.”
     “I beg of you. I am at a loss to greet you properly unless you sit over there.”
     “Oh no, I beg of you. Please, you sit over there.” My master seems unable to do anything
but parrot his guest.
     “Sir, your modesty overwhelms me. I am unworthy. Please don’t stand on ceremony. And
please do sit there.”
     “Sir, your modesty. . . overwhelms you. . . please,” came the jumbled answer from my
scarlet faced master. His mental training does not seem to have had much useful effect.
Waverhouse, who has been delightedly watching this ridiculous performance from a position just
outside the door, evidently thought it had gone on long enough.
     “Move over. If you plant yourself so close to the door, I shan’t be able to find a place to sit
down. Get along with you, don’t be shy.” He prodded my master with his foot and then, bending
down, unceremoniously shoved at my master’s bottom from behind until he was able to force
himself between the two seated figures facing the alcove. My master reluctantly slid forward.
     “Sneaze, this is my uncle from Shizuoka of whom you’ve often heard me speak. Uncle, this
is Mr. Sneaze.”
     “How do you do? Waverhouse tells me that you have been very kind and that you let him
come on frequent visits. I’ve been meaning myself to call on you for a long time and today, as I
happened to be in the neighborhood, I decided to come and thank you. I beg to be favored with
your acquaintance.”The old man delivers his old-fashioned speech of greeting with great
fluency.
     Not only is my master taciturn by nature and possessed of few acquaintances, but he has
rarely, if ever, met anyone of this antiquated type. He was thus ill at ease from the start, and
became increasingly scared as the old man’s flood of language washed about his ears. All
thoughts of Korean ginseng, of the shining stripes of that red and white envelope, or of other
aids to mental discipline have slipped from his mind, and his incoherent stutter of response
betrays his desperation. “I, too. . . yes, I also. . . just meant to call on you. . . pleased. . . yes,
indeed. . . most glad to make your acquaintance.”This babble was delivered with his head
bowed down to the floor. When he fell silent, he half-lifted his nut only to find the old man still
bent politely flat. Jittering with embarrassment, he promptly lowered his head back onto the
floor.
     The old man, timing it beautifully, lifts his head. “In the old days,” he remarked, “I, too, had
a place up here in Tokyo and for many years used to live close to the Shogun’s residence.
However, when the shogunate collapsed, I left for the country and have, since then, only
seldom visited the capital. Indeed, I find that things have changed so much that now I cannot
even find my way around. If Waverhouse is not there to help, I’m as good as lost. Great, great
changes.” He shook his head and sighed.
     “The shogunate, you know, had been established in the castle here for over three hundred
years. . .”
     Waverhouse seems to feel that the old man’s observations are taking a tiresome turn, so
he quickly interupts. “Uncle, though the shogunate was no doubt a very excellent institution, the
present government is also to be praised. In the old days, for instance, there was no such thing
as the Red Cross, was there?”
     “No, there wasn’t. Such things as the Red Cross didn’t exist at all.
     There are other welcome innovations. Only in this present time has it become possible
actually to lay one’s eyes on members of the imperial family. I’m lucky to have lived so long and
I’m especially fortunate to have attended today’s general meeting of the Red Cross where, with
my own two ears, I heard the voice of the Crown Prince. If I die tonight, I shall die a happy
man.”
     “It’s good that, once again, you can see the sights of Tokyo. D’you know, Sneaze, my uncle
came up from Shizuoka specially for today’s general meeting of the Red Cross in Ueno, from
which we are in fact now on the way home. It’s because of the meeting that he’s wearing that
splendid frock coat that I recently ordered for him at Shirokiya’s.”
     He is wearing a frock coat all right. Not that it fits him anywhere. The sleeves are too long,
the lapels are strained back too far, there’s a dent in the back as big as a pond, and the
armpits are too tight. If one tried for a year to make an ill-cut coat, one could not match the
mis-shapen marvel on Waverhouse’s uncle. I should add that the old man’s white wing-collar
has come adrift from the front stud in his spotless shirt so that, whenever he lifts his head, his
Adam’s apple bobbles out between the shirt top and the levitating collar. At first I couldn’t be
sure whether his black bow tie was fastened around his collar or his flesh. Moreover, even if
one somehow could contrive to overlook the enormities of his coat, his topknot of white hair
remains a spectacle of staggering singularity. I notice, too, that his famous iron fan, more
precisely his famous iron-ribbed fan, is lying close beside him.
     My master has now, at last, managed to pull himself together, and I observed that, as he
applied the results of his recent mental training to his study of the old man’s garb, he looked
distinctly shaken. He had naturally taken Waverhouse’s stories with several pinches of salt but
now, with the old man dumped down before his very eyes, he recognizes that the truth of the
man is stronger than any of Waverhouse’s fictions. I could see my master’s thoughts moving
behind his cloudy eyes. If my wretched pockmarks, he was thinking, constitute valuable
material for historical research, then this old man’s get-up, his topknot and his iron fan, must be
of yet more striking value. My master was obviously yearning to pose a thousand questions
about the history of the iron fan, but equally obviously believed it would be rude to make a blunt
enquiry. He also thought it would be impolite to say nothing, so he asked a question of the
uttermost banality. “There must,” he said, “have been a lot of people there?”
     “Oh, an awful lot of people, and all of them just staring at me. It seems that men have
grown too greatly and far too blantantly inquisitive. In the old days of the shogunate, things
were very different.”
     “Quite so. In the old days things were not like that at all,” says my master as if he, too,
were venerable with years. To be fair, however, I must assert that, in speaking as he did, my
master was not trying to show off. It’s just that the words came out like that, random fume
drifts from the dingy cloud-wastes of his brain.
     “What’s more, you know, all those people kept gawping at this helmet cracker.”
     “Your iron fan? It must be very heavy,” says my master.
     “Sneaze, you try it. It is indeed quite heavy. Uncle, do let him hold it.”
     Slowly the old man lifts it up and, with a courteous “Please,” hands it to my master. He, like
some worshiper at the Kurodani Temple who has been allowed briefly to hold the long sword
treasured there, holds the iron fan for several minutes and finally says, “Indeed.” Then,
reverently, he passed the ancient weapon back to its ancient owner.
     “People call it an iron fan but actually it’s a helmet cracker. A thing quite different from an
iron fan.”
     “Ah yes? And what was it used for?”
     “For cracking helmets. And while your enemy is still dazed, you just finish him off. I believe
this particular fan was in use as long ago as the early fourteenth century, possibly even by the
great General Masashige himself.”
     “Really, Uncle? Masashige’s helmet cracker?”
     “It is not known for certain to whom this beauty belonged. But it’s certainly an old one.
Probably fangled in 1335.”
     “It may be quite as ancient as you say, but it surely had that bright young Coldmoon
worried. You know, Sneaze, since we happened today to be passing through the university
grounds on our way back from Ueno, I thought it would be pleasant and convenient to drop in at
the Science Department. We asked to be shown around the physics laboratory and, because
this helmet cracker happens to be made of iron, every magnetic device in the place went
completely crazy. We caused a most almighty stir.”
     “It couldn’t have been the fan. It’s pure iron of the Kemmu period.
     Iron of superior quality. Absolutely safe.”
     “It’s not a question of the quality of the iron. Any iron would have the same effect.
Coldmoon told me so himself. So let’s not quibble about that.”
     “Coldmoon? Is that the fellow we found polishing a glass bead? A sad case, that. For he is
very young. Surely there must be something better he could do.”
     “Well,” said Waverhouse, “I suppose it is pretty heart-rending, but that’s his speciality and,
once he’s got his polishing right, he can look forward to a fine future as a scholar.”
     “How very extraordinary. If one can become a fine scholar by rubbing away at a glass
bead, the road to intellectual eminence must be open to us all. Even to me. Indeed the owners
of toy shops that sell glass marbles to schoolboys would be particularly well advantaged in the
quest for professorships. You know,” he went on, turning to my master as if seeking the
concurrence of that noted academic, “in old Cathay such polishers of stony baubles were
known as lapidaries and, I fancy rightly, their standing in the social scale was really rather low.”
     My master lets his head droop slowly downward in a gesture of respectful assent. “Quite
so,” he said.
     “Nowadays all learning seems to be concentrated on the physical sciences which, though
there’s superficially nothing wrong with them, are, when it comes to the crunch, totally useless.
In the old days it was different. One trained for the profession of arms at literal risk of one’s
life, and one consequently disciplined one’s mind to ensure that in moments of supreme effort
or danger one did not lose one’s head. I imagine you would agree that such a training was
noticeably more rigorous than buffing up beads or winding wires around an armature.”
      “Quite so,” my master once again observes with the same air of respect.
      “Tell me, uncle, that discipline of the mind which you mentioned, wasn’t it a matter, totally
different of course from buffing up beads, of sitting around dead still with your hands tucked
into your bosom?”
      “There you go again! No, the disciplining of the mind was not just a simple matter of sitting
still and saying nothing. More than two thousand years ago Mencius is said to have impressed
upon his pupils that a freed mind must then be returned to examine its liberator’s self. This
wisdom was reiterated, at least in part, by Shao K’ang-chieh, that eminent scholar of the Sung
dynasty, who insisted that the highest achievement of human aspiration was the liberated mind.
He, of course, was a Confucian, but even among the Chinese Buddhists you will find that such
worthies as the Zen master Chung Feng have always taught that a steady and devoted mind
was all important. Such teachings, as I’m sure you will agree, are by no means easy to
understand.”
      “If you’re asking me,” said Waverhouse, “I’d say they were absolutely incomprehensible.
What are the recipients of such teachings supposed to do with it?”
      “Have you ever read Priest Takuan’s discourses upon Zen doctrines?”
      “No, I’ve never even heard of him, let alone his book.”
      “Takuan, who also wrote importantly upon the seasoning of turnips, was basically
concerned with the focusing of mind. If, he says, one focuses one’s mind upon the movements
of an enemy, then the mind will be entrammeled by and subject to such movements. If upon a
foeman’s sword, then mind will be subjected to that sword.
      Correspondingly, if one’s mind is concentrated upon the thought of wishing to kill an enemy,
that thought will dominate all else. If concentrated upon one’s own sword, then it will become
effectively possessed by one’s own sword. If one’s mind centers upon the idea that one does
not wish to be killed, then it becomes possessed by that idea. If one’s mind is bent solely upon
someone’s posture, then one’s mind will be absorbed to be that posture. In brief there is
nowhere that a mind can be directed without ceasing to be itself. Thus, wherever the mind is, it
becomes, by definition, non-existent.”
      “Quite remarkable. Uncle, you must have astonishing powers of memory to be able to
quote such complicated stuff at such impressive length. Now, tell me, Sneaze, did you follow
the reasoning of that turnip pickling priest?”
      “Quite so,” replied my master, employing his stock answer to good defensive effect.
      “But don’t you agree with its truth? Where indeed should one place one’s mind? If one
focuses one’s mind upon the movements of an enemy, then the mind will be entrammeled by
and subject to such movements.
      If upon a foeman’s sword. . .”
      “Come now, uncle. Mr. Sneaze is already deeply versed in such concepts. In fact, he’s only
just emerged from his study where he was busy training his mind. As you may yourself have
noticed, he’s getting so regularly to abandon his mind that he wouldn’t even answer the door to
a visitor. So don’t worry about Sneaze. He’s perfectly all right.”
      “I’m relieved to hear what you say. It’s highly commendable that he should so often go out
of his mind. You’d do well to do as he does.”
     Waverhouse giggled, half in horror, half in embarrassment, but then, as ever, rose to the
occasion. “Alas,” he said, “I haven’t got the time. Just because you, uncle, live in a leisurely
style, you shouldn’t assume that others can afford to fritter their hours away.”
     “But are you not, in truth, idling your life away?”
     “On the contrary. I manage to cram busy moments into my leisured life.”
     “There you go again. You’re a scallywag and a scatterbrain. That’s why I keep telling you to
discipline your mind. One often hears it said that someone manages to secure odd moments of
leisure in a busy life, but I’ve never heard anyone brag of his ability to cram busy moments into
his leisured life. Have you, Mr. Sneaze, ever heard such a thing before?”
     “I don’t believe I have.”
     Waverhouse laughed again, this time in genuine amusement. “I’d hoped that wouldn’t
happen, you two ganging up on me. By the way, uncle,” he immediately continued, “how about
having some Tokyo eels?
     It’s a long time since you tried them. I’ll stand you a meal at the Chikuyo. If we take the
tram, we can be there in next to no time.”
     “Eels would be delightful, and that eel restaurant is undoubtedly the best. Unfortunately,
however, I have an appointment with Suihara, and indeed I must be off immediately.”
     “So you’re seeing Mr. Sugihara? Is that old fellow keeping well?”
     “Not Sugihara—Suihara. Once again, I catch you in an error, and it’s especially rude to
make errors about a person’s name. You should be more careful.”
     “But it’s written Sugihara.”
     “It is indeed written Sugihara but it is pronounced Suihara.”
     “That’s odd.”
     “Not odd at all. It’s technically known as a nominal reading. The common stonechat for
instance, is called a wheatear, but its name has nothing to do with either wheat or ears. The
bird is really a kind of sparrow with particularly pallid feathers on its rump. Its name, in fact,
means white arse.”
     “How extraordinary!”
     “Similarly, the magpie was originally a maggot pie, not because it had anything to do with
either maggots or meat pies, but because this pied, this black-and-white crow, was still earlier
named a Margaret pie; just as the sparrow was dubbed Phillip, the redbreast Robin, and some
tits Tom. Margaret and its associated nicknames seem to have been particularly fruitful in this
field of linguistics, for it was also from that name that the owl came to be called a madge. So to
go around referring to Suihara as Sugihara marks you as a provincial, as much a laughable
yokel as someone from the backwoods who still clumps round counting maggot pies for luck.”
     “All right, all right. I defer to your superior knowledge of patavinities. But if you’re going off
to see your old friend, how shall we arrange things?”
     “If you don’t want to come, you needn’t. I’ll go by myself ”
     “Can you manage alone?”
     “I doubt that I could walk so far. But if you would be so kind as to call a rickshaw, I’ll go
directly from here.”
     My master bowed respectfully and quickly arranged for O-san to go and find a rickshaw.
When it arrived, the old man delivered the expectedly long-winded speech of departure and,
having settled his bowler hat comfortably over his topknot, left. Waverhouse stayed behind.
     “So that’s your famous uncle.”
     “The very one.”
     “Quite so,” said my master who, reseating himself on a cushion, then sank back into
thought with his hands tucked back in his bosom.
     “Isn’t he an astonishing old fellow? I’m lucky to have such an uncle.
     He carries on like that wherever he goes. You must have been a bit surprised, eh?”
Waverhouse evidently likes the idea that my master should have been taken aback.
     “No, not at all surprised.”
     “If that old uncle of mine didn’t at least startle you, you must have uncommonly steady
nerves.”
     “It seems to me that there’s something magnificent about your uncle.
     For instance, one could but admire, admire and deeply respect, his insistence on the
necessity of training the mind.”
     “You think that admirable? Maybe when you’re well into your sixties, like my uncle, you will
be able to afford to be old-fashioned. But for the time being you’d do better to keep your wits
about you. You’ll do yourself no good if you get yourself known as devoted to old-fashioned
notions.”
     “You worry too much about being considered old-fashioned.
     Sometimes, in particular cases, being old-fashioned is far more admirable than being up-to-
date. Modern education, for instance, attempts too much, and people, ever grasping for more
and more, never once question the wisdom of its limitless spread. By comparison, a traditional,
even an old-fashioned, Oriental education is less aggressive and, by its very passivity,
produces a more discriminating taste. For the traditional education trains the mind itself.” Glibly
exact, my master trots out as his own views the twaddle that he has only recently picked up
from his philosophizing friend.
     “This,” said Waverhouse in genuine concern, “is getting serious. You sound like Singleman
Kidd.”
     At mention of that name a look of real shock came over my master’s face. For the sage
philosopher who so recently visited the Cave of the Sleeping Dragon and who, having there
converted my master to new styles of thinking, then serenely went upon his way, bore that very
name. And Waverhouse had been dead right in his comparison, for my master’s words,
solemnly spoken as his own original conclusions, were in fact all straight cribs from Kidd’s
unhinging homily. Since my master had not realized that Waverhouse knew Kidd, the speed with
which Waverhouse attributed such ideas to their true source reflected unflatteringly on the
superficiality of my master’s grasp of them. Indeed, my master actually seems bright enough to
regard Waverhouse’s comment as a slight upon himself. To establish how much Waverhouse
really knew, my master point blank asked him, “Have you ever heard him explaining his ideas?”
     “Have I ever heard him! That man’s ideas haven’t changed one whit in the long ten years
since first I heard them in our own undergraduate days.”
     “Since truth does not change, perhaps that very lack of variance at which you sneer is, in
fact, a point in favor of his theories.”
     “Oh dear, oh dear. Look, it’s because men like you lend a sympathetic ear to his ravings
that he keeps on raving away. But just consider the man. His family name suggests that he’s
descended from goats, and that straggly beard, a billy’s goatee even in college days, confirms
his blood-stock. And his own name too, is singular beyond the point of simple idiosyncrasy.
Now let me tell you a story. One day some years ago he came to visit me and, as usual,
lectured me at length on the marvels of his mental training and his consequent passive
discipline. He went on and on. All the same old tripe and he simply wouldn’t stop talking.
     Eventually I suggested it was getting late, but he wouldn’t take the hint.
     He said he didn’t feel at all sleepy and, to my intense annoyance, rattled ever on about his
cranky notions. He became so much of a nuisance that I finally told him that, however wakeful
he might feel, I was dead tired.
     I begged and coaxed him to go to bed, and at long last he went. So far, so good. But in the
middle of the night there was a major disturbance.
     A rat, I’m almost sorry to say, came and bit him on the nose. Now, although he’d worn my
ears off with his repetitive accounts of his spiritual enlightenment, of the way his training had
lifted him above all concern with merely mundane matters, as soon as the rat had nipped his
nose he displayed a tremendous interest in worldly realities. He was even worried lest his life
should be in danger. What, he demanded, if the rat’s teeth were infected? The poison, he
whimpered, would be spreading through his system while we wasted time in idle talk. Do
something, he pestered me, do something and do it quickly. Well, I didn’t know what to do. But,
after racking my brains, I staggered off into the kitchen and pressed some grains of boiled rice
onto a piece of paper, and that did the trick.”
     “How can boiled rice grains cure a rat bite?”
     “I told him that the gooey mash was an imported ointment recently invented by a famous
German doctor and that it had proved an immediate and sovereign cure when applied, in, I
think, the State of Hyderabad, to persons fanged by venomous serpents. Provided you clap this
on, your life, I told him from the bottom of my heart, will be entirely safe.”
     “So even in those early days you had a knack for bamboozlement.”
     “Well, it set Kidd’s precious mind at rest. The simpleton believed me and dropped off,
smiling, into sleepy-byland. When I woke next morning, I was particularly delighted to notice
that a trickle from my ointment had dried into a thread and solidified among the darker threads
of his daft goatee.”
     “I see your point. But he was younger then. It seems to me that he has matured into a man
of serious worth.”
     “Have you seen him lately?”
     “He was here about a week ago, and spoke for some long time.”
     “Ah, that explains why you’ve been so actively brandishing the childish negativities of the
Kidd School.”
     “It so happens that I was much impressed by his ideas, and I am currently considering
whether I myself should make the effort demanded by his mental discipline.”
     “Making an effort is always a good thing. But you’ll only make a fool of yourself if you
persist in swallowing every tinseled tale that’s flashed in front of you. The trouble with you is
that you believe anything and everything that anyone says. Though Kidd talks loftily about
freeing himself from coarse realities by the disciplined power of his mind, the truth is that, in a
real crisis, he’d be no different from the rest of us. You remember that big earthquake about
nine years ago? The only person who jumped from an upstairs window and so broke his leg
was your imperturbable Kidd.”
     “But, as I recall it, he has his own explanation of that incident.”
     “Of course he has. And a wonderful explanation naturally it is! Kidd’s version of that
scaredy-cat reality is that the working of the Zen-trained mind is so sharp that, when faced with
an emergency, it reacts with the terrifying speed of a bullet fired from a rifle. While all the
others, he says, were fleeing helter-skelter during the earthquake, he simply leapt down from
an upstairs window. This pleased him very much, for it was a proof that his training had resulted
in a truly fantastic immediacy of reaction. Kidd was thus pleased but limping. He refuses to
admit defeat.
     As a matter of fact, you may have noticed that those who make the greatest fuss about the
unworldliness bestowed upon them by Zen practices and even by ordinary Buddhism are
always the least reliable of men.”
     “Do you really think so?” asks my master who is patently beginning to wobble.
     “When Kidd was here the other day I’ll bet he said all sorts of things which you’d only
expect from a Zen priest babbling in his sleep. Well, didn’t he?”
     “In a way, yes. He emphasized the particular significance of a phrase which went
something like, ‘As a Bash of lightning, the sword cuts through the spring wind.’”
     “That same old flash of lightning. It’s pitiful to think upon, but that’s been his pet stock
phrase throughout the last ten years. Not his own phrase, of course. He lifted it from the
sayings of Wu Hsüeh, who thought it up in China more than a thousand years ago. We even
nicknamed Kidd with an appropriate pun on the sound in Japanese of Wu Hsüeh’s Chinese
name; and I do assure you that the Reverend No-perception left scarcely one of his fellow
lodgers in our student boarding house unstruck by his tedious lightning. We used to tease him
into a frenzy because he then got his patter so properly mixed up that he became quite funny.
‘As a flash of spring,’ he would shout at us, ‘the sword cuts through the lightning.’ Try it on him
the next time he calls around. When he sits there calmly propounding nonsense, interrupt and
contradict him. Keep it up until he gets rattled and in no time at all he’ll start spouting the most
amazing balderdash you’ve ever heard.”
     “Nobody’s safe with a tricky rascal like you around.”
     “I wonder who, really, is the trickster. As a rational man, I very much dislike Zen priests and
all that riff-raff with their preposterous claims to intuitive enlightenment. Living in a temple near
my house there’s an old retired priest, maybe eighty-years-old. The other day when we had a
heavy shower, a thunderbolt fell in the temple yard, where it splintered a pine tree in the old
man’s garden. People were at pains to tell me how calm, how unperturbed throughout that
frightful happening the good, old man had been, how in his spiritual strength he had shown
himself serenely indifferent to a terrifying act of nature, which had scared everyone else clean
out of their wits. But I found out later that this spiritual colossus was in fact stone deaf.
Naturally, he wasn’t shaken by the fall of a thunderbolt of which he was totally unaware. And all
too often that’s how it really is. I’d have no quarrel with Kidd if he did no more than derange
himself in his efforts to find enlightenment, but the trouble is that he goes around involving other
people. I know of at least two persons who, thanks to Kidd, are now stark raving mad.”
     “Who, for instance?”
     “Who? One was Rino Tōzen. Thanks to Kidd, he became a fanatic Zen believer, and went
to the Zen center at Kamakura and there became a lunatic. As you may know, there’s a railway
crossing in Kamakura right in front of the Engaku Temple. Well, one day poor old Rino went and
sat down there to do his meditation. He made a thorough nuisance of himself telling everyone
not to worry because, such were his spiritual powers, he could bring to a halt any train that
dared to approach him. In the event, since the train stopped of itself, his stupid life was spared,
but he then went around saying that he had a holy body of immortal strength which could
neither be burnt with fire nor drowned in water. He actually went so far as to submerge himself
in the temple’s lotus pond where he bubbled about below the water for quite some time.”
      “Did he drown?”
      “Again he was lucky. He was hauled out by a student priest who happened to be passing.
After that he returned to Tokyo and eventually died of peritonitis. It is true, as I’ve just said, that
he died of peritonitis, but the cause of his sickness was that he ate nothing but boiled barley
and pickles throughout his time at the temple. Thus, though at several removes, it was Kidd
who killed him.”
      “Overenthusiasm is not, it seems, an unmixed blessing,” said my master looking as if he
suddenly felt a bit creepy.
      “Yes, indeed. And there is yet another of my classmates whom Kidd’s meddlesome
ministrations brought to an unhappy end.”
      “How terrible! Who was that?”
      “Poor old Pelham Flap. He, too, was egged on into intemperate enthusiasms by that cranky
Kidd, and used to come out with pronouncements such as ‘The eels are going up to Heaven’; in
a sense, they eventually did.”
      “What d’you mean by that?”
      “Well, he was obsessed by food, the most gluttonous man I’ve ever met. So when his
gluttony became linked with the Zen perversities he learnt from Kidd, there wasn’t much hope
for him so far as this world is concerned. At first, we didn’t notice anything, but, now that I
come to think back upon it, he was, even from the beginning, given to saying the strangest
things. For instance, on one occasion when he was visiting me at home, he warned me
somewhat ponderously that beef cutlets might soon be coming to roost in my pine trees. On
another occasion he mentioned that in the country district where his people lived it was not
uncommon for boiled fish-paste to come floating down the river on little wooden boards. It was
still all right when he contented himself with mere bizarre remarks, but when one day he urged
me to join him in digging for sugared chestnuts and mashed potatoes in a ditch that ran in front
of the house, then I reckoned things had gone too far. A few days later they carted him off to
the loony bin at Colney Hatch and he’s been there ever since. To tell the truth, an earth-bound,
greedy pig like Flap wasn’t entitled to rise so high in the spiritual hierarchy as even to qualify to
become a lunatic, so l suppose he ought to thank Kidd for that ludicrous measure of
advancement. Yes, indeed, the influence of Singleman Kidd is quite something.”
      “Well, well. So Flap is still confined in an asylum?”
      “Oh yes; he’s very much at home in there. He’s now become a megalomaniac, and finds full
scope in that institution for the exercise of his latest bent. He recently came to the conclusion
that Pelham Flap was an unimpressive name; so, in the conviction that he is an incarnation of
Divine Providence, he’s now decided to call himself Mr. Providence Fair. He’s really putting on a
terrific performance. You ought to go and see him one of these days.”
      “Did you say ‘Providence Fair?’”
      “Yes, that’s his latest moniker. I must say that, considering he’s a certified lunatic, he’s
picked on a clever name. Anyway, his fancy is that we are all living in darkness, a condition
from which he yearns to rescue us.
      Accordingly, he fires off enlightening letters to his friends or, in fact, to just anyone. I myself
have several of his demented encyclicals. Some are extremely long, so long that I’ve even
found myself obliged to pay postage due.”
     “Then the letter I’ve just received must have come from this unbalanced Flap!”
     “Ah, so you’ve heard from him, too. That’s odd. I bet it came in a scarlet envelope.”
     “Red in the center and white on both sides, a rather unusual looking envelope.”
     “D’you know, I’m told he has them specially imported from China.
     The color scheme is supposed to symbolize one of his pottier maxims: that Heaven’s way is
white, Earth’s way is white, and that the human way turns red between them.”
     “I see. Even the envelope is pregnant with transcendental meaning.”
     “Being that of a lunatic, his symbolism is incredibly elaborate. But the quaint thing is that,
even though he’s gone completely out of his mind, his stomach seems to have maintained its
gluttonous appetites. All his letters somewhere mention food. Did he refer to food in his letter to
you?”
     “Well, yes, he did say something about sea slugs.”
     “Quite. He was very partial to sea slugs. It’s only natural he still should think about them.
Anything else?”
     “The letter did contain some passing references to blowfish and Korean ginseng.”
     “That combination is rather clever. Perhaps in his lunatic way he’s trying to advise you to
take infusions of ginseng when you poison yourself by eating blowfish.”
     “I don’t think that was quite what he meant.”
     “Never mind if he didn’t. He’s a lunatic anyway. Nothing more?”
     “One thing more. There was a bit toward the end of his letter where he advised me, most
respectfully, to drink tea.”
     “That’s amusing. Advising you to drink tea, eh? Pretty tough talk, that, at least when it
comes from Flap. I imagine he sees himself as having snubbed you. Well done, Providence
Fair!!” Goodness knows what Waverhouse finds so funny, but it certainly makes him laugh.
     My master, having now realized that the writer of that letter which he had read and re-read
with such immense respect is a notorious maniac feels distinctly annoyed with himself not least
because his recent enthusiasm and his spiritual endeavourings have all been a waste of time.
     He is also somewhat ashamed of himself for having, after assiduous study of the material,
so strongly admired the scribblings of an insane person.
     And to top off his discomforture, he harbors a sneaking suspicion that anyone so impressed
by a madman’s work is himself likely to be not altogether right in the head. He consequently sits
there looking decidedly upset in a mixed condition of anger, humiliation and worry.
     Just at that moment we heard a sound of the entrance door being roughly opened and the
sound of heavy boots crunching on the step stone.
     Then a loud voice shouted, “Hello! Excuse me. Is there anyone at home?”
     Unlike my sluggish master,Waverhouse is a buoyant person. Without waiting for O-san to
answer the caller, he calls out, “Who is it ?” Up on his feet in a flash, he sweeps through the
neighboring anteroom in a couple of strides and disappears into the entrance hall. The way he
comes barging right into someone else’s house without being announced or invited is, of course,
annoying, but, once inside, he generally makes himself useful by performing such houseboy
functions as answering the door.
     Still, though Waverhouse does in truth make himself useful, the fact remains that in this
house he’s a guest; it is not proper that, when a guest flits out to the entrance hall, the master
of the house should just stay sitting, disturbingly undisturbed, on the drawing room floor. Any
normal person would at least get up and follow a guest, any guest, out to the entrance hall. But
Mr. Sneaze is and always will be his own obdurate self.
     Seemingly totally unconcerned, he sits there with his bottom planted on a cushion, but
though such steadiness of bottom might be thought to imply some steadiness of nerve, he was
inside a simmer of emotions.
     Waverhouse can be heard conducting an animated conversation at the entrance, but
eventually he turns to shout back into the drawing room.
     “Sneaze,” he yells, “you’re wanted. You’ll have to come out here. Only you can cope with
this.”
     My master sighs in resignation and, his hands still tucked inside his robe, slowly shuffles his
way to the entrance. There he finds Waverhouse, holding the visitor’s card in his hand,
crouched down in the polite posture for receiving visitors. Seen from the back, however, that
posture looks extremely undignified. The visiting card informs my master that his latest visitor is
Police Detective Yoshida Torazo-from the Metropolitan Police Office. Standing beside Torazo-is
a tall young man in his mid-twenties, smartly dressed in a kimono ensemble of fine striped
cotton.
     Quaintly enough, this personable young fellow is like my master in that, similarly silent, he
also stands with his hands kept tucked inside his robe.
     The face strikes me as vaguely familiar and, looking at him a little more closely, I suddenly
realize why. Of course! It’s the man who burgled us a short while back and made off with that
box of yams. And here he is again, by broad daylight, standing there as calm as you please,
this time, too, at the front entrance.
     “Sneaze,” says Waverhouse, “this person is a police detective. He has called specially to
tell you that the man who burgled you the other night has now been caught. So he wants you to
come to the police station.”
     My master seems at last to understand why he is being raided by the police, and
accordingly, turning to face the burglar, bows politely. An understandable mistake, since the
burglar looks decidedly more presentable than the detective. The burglar must have been very
surprised but, since he can hardly be expected to identify himself as a burglar, he just stands
there calmly. He still keeps his hands buried in the fold of his kimono but, being handcuffed, he
cannot take his hands out even if he wants to. Any sensible person could correctly interpret the
situation by the appearances of the individuals concerned but my master, out of touch with
modern trends, still makes much too much of officials and the police. He thinks the power of the
authorities is really terrifying.
     Though he is just capable of grasping that, in theory at least, policemen and other such
creatures are no more than watchmen employed by us and paid by us, in actual practice he is
ready to drop on his hands and knees at the first sight of a uniform. My master’s father, the
headman of a district on the outskirts of some minor town, quickly developed the ugly habit of
creeping to his superiors. Perhaps as an act of divine justice, his son was born with that
cringing streak which one can but notice in my master’s character. I find this very pitiful.
     The police detective must have had a sense of humor, for he was grinning when he said,
“Please be at the Nihonzatsumi police substation tomorrow morning at nine o’clock. Would you
also please tell me precisely what goods were stolen from you?”
     “The stolen goods,” my master promptly responded, “consisted of. . .”
     but having forgotten most of them, his voice petered out. All he could remember was that
ridiculous box of yams. He didn’t really care about the yams, but he thought he would look silly
and undignified if having started to identify the property stolen, he suddenly had to stop dead.
     After all, it was he who had been burgled, and he was conscious of a certain responsibility
deriving from his burgled status. If he could not give a precise answer to the policeman’s
question, he would feel himself to be somehow less than a man. Accordingly, with sturdy
resolution, he completed his sentence. “The stolen goods,” he said, “consisted of a box of
yams.”
     The burglar seemed to think this answer was terribly funny, for he looked down and buried
his chin in his kimono collar. Waverhouse was less restrained and burst into hoots of laughter. “I
see,” he squawked, “the yams were really precious, eh?”
     Only the policeman looked at all serious. “I don’t think you’ll recover the yams,” he said,
“but most of the other things will be returned.
     Anyway, you can find out about all that at the station tomorrow. Of course, we shall need a
receipt for everything you repossess, so don’t forget to bring your personal seal. You must
arrive no later than nine in the morning at the aforementioned substation, which lies within the
jurisdiction of the Asakusa Police Office. Well, goodbye.” His mission completed, the policeman
walked out of the front door. The burglar followed him. Since he couldn’t take his hands out of
his kimono, the burglar couldn’t close the door behind him, so after he’d gone, it just stood
open. Though my master had conducted himself throughout the incident with awe-filled
diffidence towards the police, he seemed annoyed by that parting rudeness: for, looking
unpleasantly sullen, he closed the door with a vicious sliding slam.
     “Well, well,” said Waverhouse, “you do seem awed by detectives. I only wish you’d always
behave with such remarkable diffidence. You’d be a marvel of good manners. But the trouble
with you is that you’re civil only to coppers.”
     “But he’d come a long way out of his way to bring me that good news.”
     “It’s his job to come and tell you. There was no need whatsoever to treat him as anyone
special.”
     “But his is not just any ordinary job.”
     “Of course it’s not an ordinary job. It’s a disgusting job called ‘being a detective.’ An
occupation lower and dirtier than any ordinary job.”
     “If you talk like that, you’ll land yourself in trouble.”
     Waverhouse snorted disrespectfully. “Very well then,” he grunted,
     “I’ll lay off slandering detectives. But, you know, it’s not really a matter of respecting or not
respecting those insufferable sneakers. What really is shocking is this business of being
respectful to burglars.”
     “Who showed respect to a burglar?”
     “You did.”
     “How could I conceivably number a burglar among my friends? Quite impossible!”
     “Impossible, is it? But you actually bowed to a burglar.”
     “When?”
     “Just now, you bowed down like a hoop before him.”
     “Don’t be silly. That was the detective.”
     “Detectives don’t wear clothes like that.”
     “But can’t you see, it’s precisely because he is a detective that he disguises himself in
clothes like that.”
      “You’re being very pig-headed.”
      “It’s you who’s being very pig-headed.”
      “Now do just think. To start with, when a detective visits someone, do you honestly imagine
he will just stand there with his hands in his robes?”
      “Are you suggesting detectives are incapable of keeping their hands in their robes?”
      “If you get so fierce, I’ll simply have to break this conversation off. But think, man. While
you were bowing to him, didn’t he just stand there?”
      “Not surprising if he did. After all, he is a detective.”
      “What glorious self-assurance! You’re totally deaf to reason, aren’t you?”
      “No, I’m not. You keep saying that fellow was a burglar, but you didn’t actually see him
committing burglary. You just imagine he did so, and you’re being extraordinary obstinate about
it.”
      It was at this point that Waverhouse abandoned hope and accepted my master as dim
beyond redemption. He fell unwontedly silent. My master, interpreting that silence as an
admission of defeat, looks uncommonly pleased with himself. But in proportion to my master’s
self-elation, Waverhouse’s assessment of the wretched man has dropped. In Waverhouse’s
view my master’s fat-headed obstinacy has considerably lowered his value as a man. But in my
master’s view his firmness of mind has, by a corresponding amount, lifted him above the level
of such pifflers as poor Waverhouse. Such topsy-turveydoms are not unusual in this imperfect
world. A man who sees himself as magnified by his display of determination is, in fact,
dimnished in the public estimation by that demonstration of his crass willfulness. The strange
thing is that, to his dying day, the mulish bigot regards his dull opiniatrety as somehow
meritorious, a characteristic worthy to be honored. He never realizes that he has made himself
a despised laughing stock, and that sensible people want nothing more to do with him. He has,
in fact, achieved happiness.
      I understand that such joy, the wallowing well-being of a pig in its sty, is even called pig’s
happiness.
      “Anyway,” said Waverhouse, “do you intend to go to the copper shop tomorrow?”
      “Of course. I’ve been asked to be there by nine o’clock, so I’ll leave the house at eight.”
      “What about school?”
      “I’ll take a day off. That school—who cares!” retorts my master with almost venomous
vigor.
      “My, my! What a roaring boy we have become, and all of a sudden too! But will it really be
all right to take the day off?”
      “Of course it’ll be all right. My salary’s paid on a monthly basis, so there’s no danger of
them deducting a day’s wages. It’s quite safe.” There is, of course, something unpleasantly sly
in these remarks, but the very frankness of his comments reveals that my master is more
simple than dishonest. Though he is, alas, both.
      “Fine. But do you know how to get there?”
      “Why should I know the way to a police station?” My master is clearly narked. “But it will
presumably be quite easy to get there by rickshaw.”
      “Your knowledge of Tokyo seems no better than that of my uncle from the provinces. I give
up.”
      “You’re welcome.”
      Waverhouse responded to this petty spitefulness with another burst of laughter. “Don’t you
realize that the police station you’ll be visiting is not in any ordinary district. It’s down in
Yoshiwara.”
     “Where?”
     “In Yoshiwara.”
     “You mean in the red light district?”
     “That’s right. There’s only one Yoshiwara in Tokyo. Well, now do you still want to
go?”Waverhouse starts teasing him again.
     On realizing that Yoshiwara meant the Yoshiwara, my master flinched and seemed to
hesitate, but, quickly thinking it over, he decided to put on a quite unnecessarily bold front.
“Wherever it may be, red light district or not, I’ve said I’ll go, so go I will.” In circumstances of
this kind any fool is like to prove pig-headed.
     Waverhouse, unimpressed, coolly remarked, “It may prove interesting. You really ought to
see that place.”
     The ructions caused by the detective incident died away, and, in the subsequent
conversation,Waverhouse displayed his inexhaustible gift for amusing banter. When it began to
grow dark, he got up and, explaining that his uncle would be annoyed if he stayed out unduly
late, took his departure. After he’d gone, my master downed a hurried dinner and withdrew to
the study. There, again with his arms close-folded, he started to muse aloud.
     “According to Waverhouse, Singleman Kidd, whom I admired and whose example I very
much wanted to follow, is not in truth a person worthy of imitation. On the contrary, the theory
he advocates seems sadly lacking in common sense and, as Waverhouse insists, contains
features that strongly suggest lunacy, a suggestion which appears all the more well founded
when one remembers that two of Kidd’s most enthusiastic disciples are incontrovertibly mad.
An extremely dangerous situation. If I become too much involved with him, I myself am liable to
be regarded as unbalanced. What’s more, that Providence Fair fellow, whose writings really
impressed me so much that I believed him to be a great man with enormous depths of
knowledge and insight, has turned out to be an unadulterated certified maniac, confined, under
his real name of Pelham Flap, in a well-known lunatic asylum. Even allowing for the probability
that Waverhouse’s portrait of the unfortunate fellow is a distorted caricature, it still seems likely
that he’s having a high, old time in that loony bin under the impression that he’s superintending
Heaven.
     Am I, perhaps, myself a little potty? They say that birds of a feather flock together and that
like attracts like. If those old sayings are true, my admiration of a loony’s thinking, well, let’s say
my generous sympathy for his writings, suggest that I myself must be a borderline case at
least.
     Even if I’m not yet clearly certifiable, if I freely choose to live next door to a madman,
there’s an obvious risk that one fine day I might, perhaps unwittingly, topple across into his
demented territory and end up, like my neighbor, completely around the bend. What a terrifying
prospect!
     Now that I come to think of it, I confess that I’ve been more than a little surprised at the
very peculiar way in which my brain has recently been functioning. Perhaps some spoonful of
my brain cells has suffered a chemical change. Even if nothing like that has happened, it’s still
true that, of my own free will, I’ve been doing and saying immoderate things, things that lack
balance. I don’t feel, yet, anything queer on my tongue or under my armpits, but what’s this
maddening smell at the roots of my teeth, these crazy muscular tics? This is no longer a joke.
Perhaps I’ve already gone stark staring mad, and it’s only because I’ve been lucky enough not
to have hurt anybody or to have become an obvious public nuisance that I’m still allowed to
quietly live on in this district as a private citizen. This is indeed no time to be fooling about with
negatives and positives, passive or active training of the mind. First of all, let’s check my heart
rate. My pulse seems normal. Is my brow fevered? No, temperature normal; no sign there of
any rush of blood to the brain.
     Even so, I’m still not satisfied there’s nothing wrong.”
     For a little while my master sat in worried silence, straining his wits about what strains his
wits could bear. Then, after a few anxious minutes, his mumblings started up again.
     “I’ve been comparing myself solely with lunatics, concentrating on the similarities between
deranged persons and myself. That way I shall never escape from the atmosphere of lunacy.
Obviously, I’ve tackled the problem in the wrong way. I’ve been accepting lunacy as the norm,
and I’ve been measuring myself by the wonky standards of insanity.
     Inevitably, I’ve been coming to lunatic conclusions. If instead, I now start measuring myself
by the normal standards of a healthy person, perhaps I’ll come to happier results. Let me then
start by comparing myself to those close to me, those whom I know best. First, what about
that old uncle in a frock coat who came visiting today? But wasn’t it he who kept demanding
where one should place one’s mind? I doubt if he could really be counted as normal. Secondly
then, what about Coldmoon? He’s so mad on polishing glass beads that, for fear lest lunch
should deprive him of one moment’s friction, he hoiks a lunchbox down to the laboratory.
     Hardly normal either. Thirdly, Waverhouse? That man thinks his only function in life is to go
around rollicking everywhere. Such a madcap must be a completely positive kind of lunatic.
Fourthly, the wife of that man Goldfield. Her disposition is so totally poisonous as to leave no
nook for common sense. I conclude that she also must be stark staring mad. Fifthly, Goldfield
himself. Though I haven’t had the pleasure of meeting him, it is obvious that he must be less
than normal because he has achieved conjugal harmony by conforming with the warped
characteristics of so abnormal a woman. Such a degree of conformity with the abnormal
amounts to lunacy, so he’s as bad as she. Who else? Well, there are those charming little
gentlemen from Cloud Descending Hall.
     Though they are still mere sprouts, their raving madness could very easily disrupt the entire
universe. They’re mad as young March hares, the whole boiling lot of them. Thus, as I review
the list of my friends and acquaintances, most of them emerge as stained with maniac stigmata
of one sort or another. l begin to feel considerably reassured. The truth may simply be that
human society is no more than a massing of lunatics.
     Perhaps our vaunted social organization is merely a kind of bear-garden, where lunatics
gather together, grapple desperately, bicker and tussle with each other, call each other filthy
names, tumble and sprawl all over each other in mindless muckiness. This agglomeration of
lunatics thus becomes a living organism which, like cells, disintegrates and coalesces, crumbles
again to nothing and again reintegrates. Is that not the actual nature of our marvelous human
society? And within that organism, such few cells as are slightly sensible and exhibit symptoms
of discretion inevitably prove a nuisance to the rest. So they find themselves confined in
specially constructed lunatic asylums. It would follow that, objectively speaking, those locked up
in mental homes are sane, while those careering around outside the walls are all as mad as
hatters. An individual lunatic, so long as he’s kept isolated, can be treated as a lunatic, but
when lunatics get together and, so massed, acquire the strength of numbers, they also
automatically acquire the sanity of numbers. Many lunatics are, by their maniness, healthy
persons. It is not uncommon that a powerful lunatic, abusing the authority of his wealth and with
myriad minor madmen in his pay, behaves outrageously, but is nevertheless honored and
praised by all and sundry as a paragon of human virtue. I just don’t understand anything any
more.”
     I have not altered a word of my master’s sad soliloquies as he sat there, all that evening,
deep in twitchless meditation, under the forlorn light of his solitary lamp. If further evidence
were needed, his drooling words confirm the dullness of his brain. Though he sports a fine
moustache like Kaiser Bill, he is so preternaturally stupid that he can’t even distinguish between
a madman and a normal person. Not only that, but after he has given himself the heartache and
excruciating mental torment of considering lunacy as an intellectual problem, he finishes up by
dropping the matter without reaching any conclusion whatsoever. He lacks the brain power to
think through a problem. Any problem. In any field. He’s a poor old blithering mutt. The only
thing worth noting about the whole of his evening’s performance is that, characteristically, his
conclusions are as vague and as elusive as the grayish cigarette smoke leaking from his
nostrils.
     I am a cat. Some of you may wonder how a mere cat can analyze his master’s thoughts
with the detailed acumen which I have just displayed.
     Such a feat is a mere nothing for a cat. Quite apart from the precision of my hearing and
the complexity of my mind, I can also read thoughts.
     Don’t ask me how I learned that skill. My methods are none of your business. The plain fact
remains that when, apparently sleeping on a human lap, I gently rub my fur against his tummy,
a beam of electricity is thereby generated, and down that beam into my mind’s eye every detail
of his innermost reflections is reflected. Only the other day, for instance, my master, while
gently stroking my head, suddenly permitted himself to entertain the atrocious notion that, if he
skinned this snoozing moggy and had its pelt made up into a waistcoat, how warm, how
wonderfully warm, that Kittish Warm would be. I at once sensed what he was thinking, and felt
an icy chill creep over me. It was quite horrible. Anyway, it is this extrasensory gift which has
enabled me to tell you not only what my master said but even what he thought throughout this
dreary evening.
     But, as you now must know, he’s a pretty feeble specimen of his unperceptive kind. When
he’d got as far as telling himself that he just doesn’t understand anything any more, his energies
were exhausted and he dropped off into sleep. Sure as eggs are eggs, when he wakes
tomorrow he’ll have forgotten everything he’s just been thinking, even why he thought it. If the
matter of lunacy ever again occurs to him, he’ll have to start anew, right from scratch. But if that
ever does happen, I cannot guarantee that his thinking will follow the same lines in order to
arrive at the conclusion that he just doesn’t understand anything any more.
     However, no matter how often he ponders these problems, no matter how many lines of
thought he develops, one thing I can guarantee with absolute assurance. I give you my feline
word that he will invariably conclude, just before dropping asleep, with an admission that he just
doesn’t understand anything any more.
                                                 III



           Y DEAR, it’s seven already,” his wife called out from the other side of the sliding door.

M          It is difficult to say whether my master is awake or asleep: he lies facing away from
           me and makes no answer. It is, of course, his habit not to give answers. When he
           absolutely has to open his mouth, he says, “Hmm.” Even this non-committal noise does
not easily emerge. When a man becomes so lazy that he finds it a nuisance even to give an
answer, he often acquires a certain curiously individual tanginess; a certain personal spice
which, however, is never appreciated by women. Even his life partner, the less-than-fussy Mrs.
Sneaze, seems to set low store upon her husband; so one can readily imagine what the rest of
the world thinks about him. There’s a popular song which asks, “How can a fellow shunned by
both his parents and his brothers possibly be loved by some tart who’s a perfect stranger?”
How, then, can a man found unattractive even by his own wife expect to be favored by ladies in
general? There is, of course, no call upon me to go out of my way gratuitously to expose my
master as a creature repulsive to females of his own kind. But I cannot just sit by while he
cultivates illusions, blurring reality with such nitwitted notions as the happy thought that it is only
some unlucky disposition of their stars which pre-ordains his wife’s dislike of him. It is thus
purely my kind-hearted anxiety to help my master to see the world as it really is, to realize his
own reality, which has induced me to provide the foregoing account of his sexual repulsiveness.
     Mrs. Sneaze is under strict instructions to rouse him at a set time. Accordingly, when that
time arrives, she tells him so. If he chooses to disregard her call, offering not even his normal
subhuman “Hmm” of an acknowledgement, that, she concludes, is his affair. Let him lump the
consequences. With an eloquent gesture disclaiming all responsibility if her husband proves late
for his appointment, she goes off into the study with her broom in her hand and a dust cloth
slung lightly over her shoulder. Soon I heard sounds of the duster flap-flapping all over the
study.
     The daily housework has begun. Now, since it is not my job to clean rooms, I naturally do
not know if doing a room is a form of fun or a means of taking exercise. It’s certainly no
concern of mine, but I cannot forbear to comment that this woman’s method of cleaning is
totally pointless—unless, that is, she goes through the motions of cleaning for their own
ritualistic sake. Her idea of doing a room is to flip the duster curtly over the paper surfaces of
the sliding doors and let the broom glide once along the floor. With respect to these activities
she shows no interest whatsoever in any possible relation of cause and effect. As a result, the
clean places are always clean, while dusty spots and grimy corners remain eternally dusty and
begrimed. However, as Confucius pointed out when rebuking a disciple who proposed
abandonment of the wasteful and senseless practice of sacrificing a sheep on the first day of
every month, a meaningless gesture of courtesy is better than no courtesy at all. It may be that
Mrs. Sneaze’s style of cleaning a room should be recognized as minimally better than doing
nothing at all. In any event, her activities bring my master no benefit. Nevertheless, day after
day, she takes the trouble to perform her pointless rite. Which is, alas, the sole redeeming
feature. Mrs. Sneaze and room cleaning are, by the custom of many years, firmly linked in a
mechanical association; however, their combination has in practice achieved no more actual
cleaning than in those old days before she was born and in those even older days before
brooms and dusters had been invented. One might indeed say that the relation between Mrs.
Sneaze and the cleaning of rooms resembles that of certain terms in formal logic which, totally
unrelated in their nature, are nevertheless formally linked.
      Unlike my master, I am an early riser, so by this time I was already feeling distinctly
peckish. There is, of course, no question of a mere cat expecting to get its breakfast before the
human members of the household had sat themselves down at the table. Yet I remain a cat,
with all a cat’s pure appetites and instincts. And once I had begun to wonder if there could
possibly be a delicious smell of soup drifting out of that abalone shell, which serves as my
feeding platter, I was simply unable to remain still. When, knowing its hopelessness, one yet
hopes on against hope, it is always wisest to concentrate on thinking about that hope and to
discipline oneself into silent immobility. But it’s easier said than done.
      One cannot help wanting to check whether one’s hope has, or has not, been fulfilled in
reality. Even when it is absolutely certain that a check must bring disappointment, one’s mind
will not stop fidgeting until it has been fully and finally disappointed. I could no longer hold
myself in check and accordingly crept out to investigate the kitchen. First, I peep into my
abalone shell in its usual place behind the kitchen furnace. Sure enough, the shell is empty, just
as it was last night after I’d licked it clean. This morning, that shell looks singularly desolate,
chillily reflecting the weird glow of the autumn sunlight filtering down through the skylight. O-san
has already transferred the boiled rice into the serving container and is now stirring soup in the
saucepan on the stove. Rice-rich liquid that had boiled over in the cooking-pot has dried into
hard streaks, some of them looking like stuck-on strips of high-class paper, down the sides of
the pot. Since both rice and soup are now ready, I thought my own breakfast should be served
at once. It’s silly to be backward at such times and, even if I don’t succeed in getting what I
want, I shan’t lose anything by trying. After all, even a hanger-on is as much entitled as anyone
else to feel the pangs of hunger; so why shouldn’t I call out for my breakfast? First I tried a
coaxing kind of mew; an appealing, even a mildly reproachful, noise. O-san does not take the
slightest notice. Since she was born polygonal, I am perfectly well aware that her heart is as
cold as a clock, but I am counting on my mewing skills to move her rusty sympathies. Next I
tried my most pitiable miaowing. I believe this voice of entreaty has a tone so pathetic in its
loneliness that it should make a wanderer in a strange land feel that his heart is being torn in
pieces. O-san ignores it completely. Can this woman actually be deaf? Hardly. For were she
deaf, she’d not be able to hold down her job as a maidservant. Perhaps she is deaf only to cat
voices. I understand that there are persons who are colorblind. Though such persons may think
their eyesight perfect, from the medical point of view they are in fact deformed. This O-san
creature could be voice blind, and persons so deformed are no less freaks than their colorblind
homologues. For a mere monstrosity, she’s a jolly sight too lordly. Take the nights, for instance,
however hard I plead with her that I need to go outside, never once has she opened the door. If
by some perversion of her character she should once let me out, there’s not a wax cat’s chance
in hell that she’d ever let me in again. Even in summer, the night dew is bad for one’s health,
and winter frost is naturally much worse. You can’t imagine the agony of staying awake under
the eaves and waiting for the sun to rise.
      The other evening when I chanced to be shut out, some foul stray dog attacked me and
only by the skin of my teeth did I manage to escape onto the roof of the tool shed, there to
shiver the whole long night away.
      All such evil hours are brought upon me by the endless wintriness of that hard woman’s
heart. I know well enough that from such a person my miaowing performance will evoke no
kindness, but just as in the proverb a hungry man will turn to God, a man in want will turn to
robbery and a lovelorn loon will take to writing songs, so in my extremity will I try anything once.
Accordingly, in a last attempt to catch her attention, my third effort was an especially intricate
interweaving of mews and muted yowling, which, though, at least in my unshakable judgement,
a music no less moving than that of Beethoven, produces no effect whatsoever within that
implacable creature’s unsociably savage breast.
      Suddenly, O-san sinks down to her knees and, sliding out a removable floorboard, extracts
from the cavity below a stick of charcoal roughly four inches long. Rapped sharply against the
corner of the stove, the length broke into some three main pieces and the surrounding area was
liberally showered with black dust. A plentiful powdering of charcoal seems to have been added
to the soup, but O-san is not the kind of woman to be bothered by such trifles. She quickly
shoved the three main pieces under the bottom of the saucepan and so into the stove. I see
little prospect of her interrupting her sullen chores to give ear to my symphony. Well, that’s the
way it is.
      Dejected, I set off back to the living room and, as I passed by the bathroom door, I noticed
that my master’s three small daughters were there busily engaged in washing their faces.
Though I say they were washing their faces, the two older girls are still at the kindergarten
stage, while the youngest is so tiny that she cannot even trail along with her sisters to their
place of schooling. It follows that not one of them can yet properly wash her face or make
herself presentable. The baby, having hauled a tangle of damp floor rags out of the mop
bucket, is happily using it to stroke her face. I would have thought it most unpleasant to wash
one’s face with floor rags, but one cannot be surprised at any oddness in this child who
regularly responds to earthquakes with outcries of pure joy. Which may, of course, only
demonstrate that she is a more enlightened being than Singleman Kidd. Now the eldest girl
takes the responsibilities of her seniority with expectedly officious seriousness.
      Accordingly, she drops her gargling cup and starts trying to part her baby sister from the
latter’s precious floor rags. “Baby-dear,” she tells her, “that’s for wiping floors.”
      But Baby-dear, a self-opinionated tot, is not so easily persuaded and, with a piercing shout
of “No, babu,” she tugs at the floor-cloth which her sister has just grabbed. Nobody knows what
“babu” means or how its use originated, but Baby-dear lets fly with it whenever she loses her
temper.
      As the children tug at the ends of that sodden rag, water squeezed from its center portion
starts pitilessly dripping down on Baby-dear’s twee tooters. Were it only a matter of wet feet,
that would be no great shakes, but soon her knees are also sopping wet. Baby-dear is wearing
a backhammon. I’ve been trying to find out the meaning of that word, and it would seem that to
the children it signifies any kind of pattern, in this case patterned clothing, of a medium size.
Where they got this information, alas, I could not say.
      “Baby-dear,” the eldest girl is saying, “your backhammon’s getting wet. Be a good baby,
Baby-dear, and let go of this cloth.”This is remarkably intelligent advice, especially from a girl
who herself until just recently thought backhammon was a kind of game. Which reminds me that
this eldest girl is constantly misusing words and that her malapropisms not infrequently amuse
her adult listeners. The other day she remarked that cornflakes were sparking up from the fire
and again, when being dosed with castor oil, asked whether the medicine had been squeezed
from the brother of bollocks. She once haughtily announced that she was no common plum
child, and it was several days before I discovered that she was in fact bragging that she’d not
been born in some back slum. My master sniggers whenever he hears such errors, but I’m
prepared to bet that when he’s teaching English in his school, he makes in sober earnest far
sillier mistakes than his daughter ever does.
      Baby-dear, who incidentally always refers to herself as Baby-beer, at last notices that her
backhammon is now soaking wet and, bawling out that “Baby-beer’s backhammon is got cold,”
begins to howl her head off.
      Of course, a cold backhammon is a pretty serious matter, so here comes O-san running
from the kitchen. Quickly she dispossesses the squabbling children of their treasured floor rag
and cleans the baby up.
      Throughout the hullaballoo, the second daughter, Sunko, has remained suspiciously quiet.
Standing with her back toward us, she has got hold of a small jar of her mother’s cosmetic
which has tumbled off its shelf and is now busy plastering white paste on her face. First, having
poked her finger into the jar, she drags a broad white line down the length of her nose. Which
at least makes it easier to see where her nose is. Next, with her finger liberally reloaded, she
daubs thick blobs on her cheeks and rubs the stuff around until two white lumps are sticking out
from her face. Her beautifying self-adornment had reached this interesting stage when O-san
bustled up to deal with Baby-dear. Once Baby-dear was set to rights, Sunko, too, was wiped
back into human semblance. She emerged from the white paste looking distinctly peeved.
      Leaving this distressing scene behind me, I moved through the living room to inspect my
master’s bedroom and so to ascertain whether or not he has at last got up. Stealthily I squinny
into the room, but my master’s head is nowhere to be seen. Instead, one large and high-arched
sole is sticking out from the bottom end of the old-fashioned sleeved bed quilt. He seems to
have burrowed down to avoid the unpleasantness of being woken up. He looks, in fact, like a
not too clever tortoise. At this point Mrs. Sneaze, who had finished cleaning the study, returned
to the bedroom with her broom and duster shouldered. Halting at the entrance, she called out
as before, “Haven’t you got up yet?” then stood there for a while, gazing in disgust at the lump
of headless bedding. As before, her question brought no answer.
      Mrs. Sneaze advanced a short way into the room. Planting her broom upright with a slightly
menacing plunk, she pressed again for an answer.
      “Not yet woken up, dear?”
      This time, my master is awake all right. Indeed, it is precisely because he is awake that he
is now, head and body tucked well down, entrenched within the bedclothes against the
expected onslaught from his wife. He seems to be relying on some silly notion that, so long as
he keeps his head concealed, his wife may fail to notice that he’s still snugged down in bed.
She shows no disposition to let him off so slightly. Her first call, reckoned my master, had come
from the threshold, so there should still be a reasonably safe distance, perhaps as much as six
feet, between himself and her. He was consequently shaken when the plunk of her grounded
broom-haft came from less than three feet off. Worse still, her solicitous, “Not yet woken up,
dear?” sounded, even under the bedclothes, twice more menacing than before. Seeing no hope
for it, my master thereupon surrendered, and his small voice answered, “Hmm.”
      “You said you’d be there by nine o’clock. Hurry up, or you’ll be late.”
     “You don’t have to tell me. I’m getting up,” replied my master with his face spectacularly
visible through the cuff of one sleeve of the bedclothes. His wife is used to this old trick. Once
he has managed to convince her that he’s going to get up, he usually goes straight back to
sleep again. So she’s learnt to keep a sharp eye on his morning gambits and therefore answers
his mumbled promises with a curt, “Well, get up now.” It’s annoying, when one’s said one’s
getting up, to be told then to get up. For a selfish man like my master, it is even more than
annoying.
     In one wild, angry gesture, he thrusts aside the pile of bedclothes that he’s been keeping
over his head, and I note that his eyes are staringly wide-open.
     “Don’t make all that fuss. If I say I’m getting up, then I’m getting up.”
     “But you always say you’re getting up, and then you never do.”
     “Nonsense! When have I ever told a ridiculous lie like that?”
     “Why, always.”
     “Don’t be so silly.”
     “Who are you calling silly? Answer me that.” She looks quite dashingly militant as she
stands there beside the bed with her broomstick planted like a spear shaft. But at this very
moment,Yatchan, the child of the rickshawman who lives in the street behind us, suddenly burst
out crying with a most tremendous, “Waa!” That Yatchan should start crying as soon as my
master gets angry is the responsibility of his ghastly mother. For the wife of the rickshawman is
paid to make her baby scream every time my master gets into a fury. Which is fine for the
money grubbing mother, but pretty hard on Yatchan. With a mother like that, a child could well
have cause to cry around the clock. If my master realized the way things have been rigged and
made the little effort needed to control himself, then Yatchan might live longer than seems likely.
Even though the victim’s mother is being handsomely rewarded by the Goldfields for her
torturing of her child, only a person far more dangerously mad than Providence Fair would do
such a lunatic thing. Were Yatchan only made to cry on the occasions of my master’s anger, he
could probably survive, but every time that Goldfield’s hireling hooligans come shouting round
the house, then too the wretched infant is hurt until he screams. It is taken for granted that the
hooligan catcalls will infuriate my master; so, whether or not my master does flare up,Yatchan
catches hell in expectation of my master’s anger. Every vulgar yell asserting that my master is
a terracotta badger is thus invariably matched by a heart-felt yell from Yatchan. Indeed, it has
become difficult to distinguish between Yatchan and my master. It is simple to start my master
off by indirect approaches. One only needs to torment Yatchan briefly to produce the same
effect on my master as slapping him directly in the face. I understand that years ago in Europe
whenever a condemned criminal escaped to a foreign land and could not be recaptured, it was
the custom to fashion a simulacrum of the fugitive which was then burnt in his stead. Among
these hooligans of Goldfield’s there seems to be a tactician well acquainted with such ancient
European practices, and I must confess he’s certainly worked out some very clever ploys. Both
the little louts from Cloud Descending Hall and Yatchan’s mother represent real problems for
my master who, when all is said and done, is a man of limited abilities. There are many other
equally awkward customers to be coped with. One might even say that, from my master’s point
of view, the entire district is populated with awkward customers; since these others are not
immediately relevant to this story, I’ll introduce them later as developments require. For the
moment, I will return you to my master quarreling in the bedroom with his wife.
     On hearing Yatchan cry and at such an early hour, my master must have felt really angry.
He jerked sharply up into a sitting position among the bedclothes, for at times of such stress no
years of mental training, not even the presence of Singleman Kidd himself, could exercise the
least restraint. Then with both hands he began to scratch his scalp with such vicious violence
that nearly every square inch of its skin was clawed away. A month’s accumulated dandruff
came floating down to settle nastily on his neck and pajama collar. It is a sight not easily
forgotten. Yet another shock greeted my wondering eyes when they fell upon his bristling
moustache. Perhaps that ragged growth felt it would be less than seemly to be calm when its
owner was so savagely distraught but, whatever the reason, each individual hair has gone
completely berserk and, forgetting all sense of co-operation in the frightful vigor of their self-
expression, the various hairs are jutting out like the bayonets of ill-trained conscripts in
whichever wild direction takes their frantic fancy.
     This, too, constitutes a sight not easily forgotten. Only yesterday, out of regard for the
bathroom mirror and in deference to the German Emperor, these hairs had obediently mustered
themselves into disciplined formation, but after no more than a single night’s repose all the
benefits of their training have been scattered to the winds. Each separate conscript hair has
reverted to its aboriginal nature and has resumed that individuality which reduces the
moustache to the condition of a rabble.
     The same sad process of rapid degeneration may be observed in my master. In the space
of a single night his mental training loses all effect, and his inborn boorishness comes bristling
back into view through every pore in his skin. When one pauses to wonder how such a wildly
whiskered tusker has managed to keep his job as a teacher, then for the first time one grasps
the varied vastness of Japan. Indeed, only a land of such true enormity could find room for
Goldfield and his pack of snooping curs and rabid bitches to pass themselves off as human
beings.
     My master seems to believe that in a society where those monstrosities can indeed pass
for human, there is no conceivable reason why his own modest eccentricities should lead to his
dismissal. In the last analysis one could always obtain an enlightening explanation of the whole
crazy set-up by sending a postcard of enquiry to that noble pile which shelters Providence Fair.
     At this point my master opened his ancient eyes, whose drifting cloudiness I have
previously described in detail, as wide as they can stretch and, with an unaccustomedly sharp
dance, stared at the cupboard in the wall that faced him. This cupboard is about six feet in
height, divided horizontally into top and bottom halves, each half having two sliding paper-doors.
The bottom end of my master’s bedclothes reached almost to the lower part of the cupboard
so that, having just sat up, he cannot help but focus, as soon as his lids are lifted, on the
picture-painted paper of the cupboard’s sliding doors. Here and there the paper skin has peeled
or been torn away, and the curious underlayers, the flattened intestines of the panels, are
distinctly visible. These innards are of many different sorts. Some are printed papers, others
are handwritten; some have been pasted face-side in, others upside-down. The sight of this
displayed anatomy of paper stirred in my master a sudden urge to read what was written
there. The fact that my master, who until but a moment ago was so frenetically incensed that
he could happily have grabbed the wife of the rickshawman and ground her nose against a pine
tree, now suddenly wishes to read old scraps of paper may seem a little strange, but actually
such conduct is not all that unusual in an extrovert so easily entered. It is another version of the
squalling baby who starts to coo as soon as he is given sweets. Years ago in his student days,
when my master lodged in a temple, there were five or six nuns living in the room next to his
with nothing but the sliding paper-doors between them. Now, nuns are by nature the cattiest of
all cat-natured women.
     These nuns seem quickly to have perceived the true and inmost character of my master, for
they made it their practice to chant, tapping out the rhythm on the rim of their cooking-pot, that
jingle parents use to tease a child about its changeable moods:



    The little crow that cried and cried
    Has grown a grin six inches wide.



My master, I’ve been told, has loathed nuns ever since. They may well be detestable, but their
chanting told a truth. For, though none of his moods is lasting, my master contrives to weep, to
laugh, to rollick, and be downcast more frequently than anyone else in the world. Putting it
kindly, one might say he shows a certain lack of tenacity and is inclined to change his mind for
insufficient reason. Translated into simple everyday language, that merely means that my
master is a shallow, stubborn, spoiled brat. Now, being a spoiled brat, it’s not at all surprising
that, full of fighting spirit, he should jerk his torso fiercely up from the bed and then, balanced on
his bottom, suddenly change his mind and begin to read the flattened intestines of a damaged
cupboard door.
     The first thing he noticed was a photograph of Itō Hirobumi standing on his head. By
twisting his neck to study the date associated with this irreverently pasted picture, my master
found it to be September 28, 1878. So, even as long as twenty-seven years ago, the present
Resident-General in Korea was already doing somersaults. Wondering how the Resident-
General might have occupied himself before Korea was available to reside in, my master
crooks himself sufficiently to decipher “Finance Minister.” This certainly is a great man. Even
when he’s standing on his head, he’s a Finance Minister. A bit to the left of that information, the
Minister again appears. This time he is lying down, having a siesta. Which is very
understandable. One cannot be expected to stand on one’s head for any protracted period.
Near the bottom of the exposed area, the two words “You are” can be seen written in large
ideographs. My master naturally wanted to read the rest of such an aggressively sized
sentence but, alas, nothing more was visible. Of the next line down, all that can be read is
“quickly” and, once again, there’s no clue to the rest of the text. If my master were a detective
of the Metropolitan Police Board, he might have satisfied his curiosity by ripping off the rest of
the top layer of paper even though the cupboard door, its skin and its intestines, all belonged to
somebody else. Since no detective has been properly educated, such barbarous persons will
do anything to sate their lust for facts. Which is a lamentable state of affairs.
     I wish they would behave with a little more civilized reserve. Matters would be improved if a
rule were established that all facts should be withheld from detectives whose conduct lacks
reserve. I understand that these disreputable servants of the public sometimes arrest innocent
citizens on the basis of false accusations and manufactured evidence.
     That public servants, employed and paid for by honest citizens, should be given scope to
pin crimes on those who pay and employ them is yet another example of the lunatic condition of
human society.
     My master next studies the center part of the exposed paper where a map of Oita
Prefecture has been pasted upside-down. Since the Resident-General in Korea is standing on
his head, it’s not surprising that Oita Prefecture should join him in his somersaults. When my
master’s eyes had taken in the overthrow of Oita, he clenched both hands and thrust his fists
on high toward the ceiling. These mantic gestures foretell a coming yawn. His yawning, too, is
signally abnormal: less a human yawn than the yowling of a whale. That performance over, my
master pulled some clothes on and lurched off into the bathroom for a wash. His wife, who had
been impatiently waiting for this moment, quickly gathered up the quilt, folded it and put the
bedclothes in the cupboard. Then, as usual, she began to clean the room. Just as Mrs.
     Sneaze’s cleaning system has become a stylized drill, so too over the years her husband
has established a routine pattern for washing his face.
     I think I earlier mentioned his noisy morning gargling, its variations of bass and treble
bubblement, and today he’s doing it as usual. Finally, having made the usual careful parting in
his hair, he appeared in the living room with a hand towel draped across one shoulder. There,
with a lordly air, he sat himself down beside the oblong brazier.
     Mention of that object may lead some of you to imagine an oblong brazier made from fine
zelkova wood. Some perhaps may picture a brazier of black persimmon wood, its inner sides
entirely copper plated, against the lip of which a sexy-looking charmer with long and freshly
washed tresses, sitting with one knee raised, seductively taps out her long slim tobacco pipe.
But poor old Sneaze’s brazier is sadly less than picturesque. It is, in fact, so ancient that none
but an expert could guess what wood was used to make it. The fine point about any such
oblong brazier is the quality and brilliance of the gloss acquired by years of patient polishing,
but this brazier is not only undetermined as to its material, which could as well be cherry as
zelkova and paulownia as cherry, but has never once been polished. It is consequently a
gloomy and most repellent object. Where, I wonder, could he have gotten it? He would certainly
not have bought it. Could it, then, have been a present?
     Not that I’ve ever heard. Which leaves us with the possibility that he stole it, and at this
point all histories of the brazier become a little vague.
     Many years ago, among my master’s relatives there was an old, old man.
     When that ancient died, my master was asked to live in the dead man’s house and just look
after it. Some years later when my master moved out to occupy his own, new house, he simply
took along with him, possibly unthinkingly, the oblong brazier which he had used so often that he
had come to regard it as his personal property. Usufruct decaying into usucaption, which
sounds a little wicked. Indeed, when one considers the matter, his act was certainly wrong.
However, such happenings are common enough. For instance, I understand that bankers grow
so accustomed to handling other people’s money that they come to regard it as their own.
Similarly, public officials are the servants of the people and can reasonably be regarded as
agents to whom the people have entrusted certain powers to be exercised on the people’s
behalf in the running of public affairs. But as these officials grow accustomed to their daily
control of affairs, they begin to acquire delusions of grandeur, act as though the authority they
exercise was in fact their own and treat the people as though the people had no say in the
matter. Since the world is thus demonstrably full of such usurpers, one cannot brand my master
as a thief just because of this business with the oblong brazier. However, if you insist that he
has a thievish disposition, an evidenced inclination to theft, then the plain fact is that he shares
that criminal cant with everyone else in the world.
     I had got as far as saying that my master sat down beside the oblong brazier, but I have
not yet explained that, in doing so, he was in fact seating himself at the dining table. Seated
around the other three sides and already tucking into their breakfasts were Baby-dear, who
cleans her face with floor rags;Tonko, whose learning includes the starry phenomena of Castor
and Bollocks; and sweet little Sunko, who pokes about into make-up jars. My master looks at
his three daughters with impartial distaste. Tonko’s face is flat and round like the steel guard on
some old-fashioned sword. Sunko takes after her elder sister so far as face shape is
concerned, but its color immediately puts me in mind of those round red lacquer trays from
Okinawa. Baby-dear’s face is the odd one out, and very odd it is: long and square at the
corners, with the long sides of the oblong stretching sideways. Of themselves, oblong heads
are not uncommon but in such cases the greater length is vertical. An oblong head like Baby-
dear’s, horizontally long, is, I think, unheard of.
     However vertiginous the variance of fashion, I cannot believe that a square face squashed
out sideways will ever prove the rage. My master suffers random spasms of concern about his
growing daughters. Their growth is unpreventable, and they are certainly all growing. Indeed,
the speed of their growth reminds one of the sheer blue force of a bamboo shoot accelerating
into sapling size in the garden of some Zen-purveying temple. Every time my master notices an
increase in his children’s size, he becomes as nervous as if an inexorable pursuer were catching
up behind him. Though an inordinately vague person, my master does realize that these three
daughters are all females. He also understands that, being females, proper arrangements for
their disposition must be made.
     He understands, yes, but that is all, for he further realizes that he is quite incapable of
getting them married off. Therefore, though they are indeed his very own offspring, he finds
them more than he cares for. If he’s the kind of father who finds his children a bit too much,
then he should never have produced them. But such behavior is all too typically human. It is
painfully easy to define human beings. They are beings who, for no good reason at all, create
their own unnecessary suffering.
     But children are terrific. Not even dreaming that their father is thus worried stiff about what
to do with them, they go on eating happily. The only unmanageable one is Baby-dear. Baby-
dear is now nearly three-years-old, so her mother, seeking to be kind, has provided for her
mealtime use a pair of chopsticks and a rice bowl, all of size appropriate to her age. But Baby-
dear will have none of it. First she grabs her eldest sister’s chopsticks, then her rice bowl.
Though they are too large for her, she struggles to control these quite unmanageable things.
One finds in this sad world that among mean-spirited persons, the greater their incompetence
and inefficiency, the sharper their sense of self-importance and the more virulent their ambition
to occupy unsuitably high official posts.
     This style of character always begins to develop at the stage now reached by Baby-dear;
and, since the roots of these defects of character run down so deeply into babyhood, wise
persons quickly resign themselves to the wretched truth that no subsequent discipline or
education can eradicate such flaws. Baby-dear positively wallows in her tiny tyrannies, refusing
to surrender the enormous rice bowl and the hefty chopsticks that she’s looted from her sister.
Perhaps, since she is seeking by sheer violence to control objects far too big for her to handle,
she has no choice but to play the tyrant. In any event, she begins by clamping both chopsticks
tight together in a firm grip applied too far down toward their lower ends. She then rams this
wooden wedge into the bottom of the rice bowl, which is about four-fifths full of rice topped up
to its brim with bean-paste soup. The rice bowl had managed, somewhat precariously, to retain
its balance throughout Baby-dear’s initial raid but, as soon as it felt the force of her chopstick
battering ram, it tilted some thirty degrees out of the true and poured a sluice of still-hot soup
all down the front of its assailant. But Baby-dear is not to be daunted by such a petty setback.
For Baby-dear’s a tyrant. Accordingly, she yanks the chopsticks savagely out of the bowl,
shoves her rosebud mouth right up against the rice bowl’s lip, and then proceeds to shovel
masses of soggy rice into her slurping maw. Grains that escape her wild style of engulfment
joined the soup in its bid for freedom and, with a happy shout, alighted variously on her nose
tip, on her cheeks, and on her chin.
     Those, and they were many, that missed their human target finished up on different parts of
the floor. This is a most reckless manner in which to eat rice. I respectfully advise all persons in
positions of power, including that infamous Goldfield fellow, that if they persist in treating people
with the same crude violence that Baby-dear applies to the rice bowl and the chopsticks, they
too will finish up with only a spattering of rice grains in their mouths. The only grains that will, in
fact, land up in their gullets will not be those on whom pressure has been applied, but merely
those that have lost all sense of direction. I do most earnestly entreat all persons of influence to
reflect deeply upon this matter. Men who are truly wise in this world never act so stupidly.
     The eldest girl, her bowl and chopsticks snitched by the baby, has been obliged to make do
with Baby-dear’s dwarf versions, but the baby’s bowl can hold so little rice that three quick
mouthfuls empty it. Forced into frequent replenishments, she has already downed her fourth
helping and is apparently going to take a fifth. She lifts the lid of the rice-container and, holding
the broad rice scoop momentarily poised, stares at the bunkered grains as though undecided
whether or not to help herself to more. In the end she plumps for another bowlful and carefully
scoops out a dollop of rice that looks unburnt. So far, so good. However, as she brought the
laden scoop up toward the rim of her bowl, she accidentally banged the two together, with the
result that a largish lump of rice fell down onto the floor. Looking not the least put out, she
began to pick it up again with almost finicking care. Naturally, I wondered what she was going
to do with it. She put it all, every single grain, back into the container. Which seems a dirty thing
to do. The conclusion of this ugly business came at the same moment as the climax of Baby-
dear’s performance with the shoveling chopsticks. And an eldest sister can hardly be expected
to overlook a face as foully spattered with rice as Baby-dear’s.
     “Baby-dear, you look terrible with your face all covered in rice.” She begins to clean up the
mess. First, she disengaged the rice grain sticking on the baby’s nose but, instead of throwing
it away, popped it, much to my surprised disgust, into her own mouth. Next she tackles the
cheeks.
     Here the grains, some twenty altogether, are clotted in scattered groups. One by one, her
eldest sister picked the kernels off the baby’s cheeks, and one by one she ate them.
     At this point, the middle sister, Sunko, who hitherto has demurely busied herself with
crunching pickled radish, suddenly scooped from her brimming soup bowl a broken gobbet of
sweet potato and slung that wretched object straight into her widely opened mouth. As my
readers are no doubt aware, nothing can sear the mouth more painfully than sweet potato
cooked in bean-paste soup. Unless very careful, even a hardened adult can give himself a truly
nasty burn. It is thus understandable that a mere beginner in the art of eating such sweet
potatoes should feel scorched, as certainly did Sunko, out of her tiny mind. With a fearful
squawking, “Waa,” she spat the burning gobbet out upon the table. This slightly mangled object
skidded across the table surface, coming at last to rest within convenient grabbing distance of
Baby-dear. Now Baby-dear, as tough-mouthed as a carthorse, just dotes on sweet potatoes.
Seeing her favorite goody skid to a steaming halt only a hand’s stretch from her rice-stripped
face, she pitched away her chopsticks, snatched the sweet potato and gobbled it gladly down.
     My master, a fully conscious witness of all these ghastly happenings, watches them as
dispassionately as if they were occurring on some other planet. Without saying a word, he has
quietly got on with eating his own rice and soup, and is now engaged in probing his jaws with a
toothpick.
     He seems to be following a policy of complete non-intervention, even of masterly inactivity,
in the rearing of his daughters. One fine day in the not too distant future this trio of bright
college girls may be fated to find themselves wild lovers with whom, for the sake of passion,
they’ll run away from home. If that in fact should happen, I expect that, calmly continuing to eat
his rice and soup, my master will just watch them as they go upon their ways. He is certainly a
man of little resource, but I’ve noticed that those who are nowadays regarded as most
admirably resourceful know nothing, in fact, except how to deceive their fellows with lies, how
to sneak up upon the unwary, how to jump queues, how to create a sensation by bluffing, and
by what tricks to ensnare the simple-minded. Even boys at the middle school level, influenced
by such conduct, get the idea that only by such means can they expect to make their way in the
world. Indeed they seem to think that they can only become fine gentlemen by the successful
perpetration of acts of which they ought, in truth, to be thoroughly ashamed. Of course, these
imitative loutlings do not display resource, and are in fact no more than hooligans. Being a
Japanese cat, I have a certain amount of patriotic sentiment and, every time I see these
allegedly resourceful creatures I wish I had the chance to give them a right, good hiding. Each
new creature of that type weakens the nation to the degree of his presence. Such students are
a disgrace to their school, and such adults a disgrace to their country. Nonetheless, disgraceful
as they are, there are lots of them about. Which is really inexplicable. The human beings in
Japan, shamefully enough, seem less mettlesome than the cats. One must admit that,
compared with hooligans, my master is a very superior model of humankind. He is superior
because he is weak-minded. His very uselessness makes him their superior. He is their clear
superior because he is not smart.
     Having thus uneventfully, and with a show of no resource whatever, finished his breakfast,
my master put on his suit, climbed into a rickshaw and left to keep his appointment with the
police. As he climbed aboard, he’d asked the rickshawman if he knew the location of Nihon-
zutsumi.
     The rickshawman just grinned. I thought it rather silly of my master to make a point of
reminding the rickshawman that his destination lay in the brothel quarter.
     After my master’s unusual departure—unusual, that is, because he left in a rickshaw—Mrs.
Sneaze had her own breakfast and then started nagging at the children. “Hurry up,” she says,
“or you’ll be late for school.”
     But the children pay no heed. “There isn’t,” they answer back, “any school today,” and they
make no effort to get themselves ready.
     “Of course there is,” she snaps in a lecturing tone of voice. “Hurry and get ready.”
     “But yesterday the teacher said, ‘We have no school tomorrow,’” the eldest girl persists.
     It was probably at this point that Mrs. Sneaze began to suspect that the children might be
right. She went to the cupboard, lifted out a calendar and checked the date. Today is marked in
red, the sign of a national holiday. I fancy that my master was unaware of this fact when he
sent a note to his school advising them of his absence. I fancy, too, that Mrs.
     Sneaze was similarly unaware when she put his note in the post. As for Waverhouse, I
can’t make up my mind whether he, too, was unaware or whether he simply found it diverting to
keep quiet.
     Mrs. Sneaze, surprised and softened by this discovery, told the children to go out and play.
“But please,” she bade them, “just behave yourselves.”
     She then settled down, as she daily does, to get on with her sewing.
     For the next half hour peace reigned throughout the house, and nothing happened worth my
bother to record. Then, out of the blue, an unexpected visitor arrived: a young girl, student
aged, I would guess, perhaps seventeen or eighteen. The heels of her shoes had worn crooked
and her long, purple skirt trailed along the ground. Her hair was quaintly dressed in two big
bulges above the ears, so that her head resembled an abacus bead. Unannounced, she walked
in through the kitchen entrance. This apparition is my master’s niece. They say she is a student.
She’s always liable to drop in on a Sunday, and she usually contrives to have some kind of row
with her uncle. This young lady possesses the unusually beautiful name of Yukie but, far from
reminding its viewers of a snowy river, her ruddy features are of that dull normality which you
can see in any street if you take the trouble to walk a hundred yards.
     “Hullo, Auntie!” she casually remarked as, marching straight into the living room, she
plonked herself down beside the sewing box.
     “My dear, how early you are. . .”
     “Because today’s a national holiday. I thought I’d come and see you in the morning, so I left
home in a hurry about half past eight.”
     “Oh? For anything special?”
     “No, but I haven’t seen you for such a long time, and I just wanted to say hullo.”
     “Well then, don’t just say hullo but stay for a bit. Your uncle will soon be back.”
     “Has Uncle gone out already? That’s unusual!”
     “Yes, and today he’s gone to rather an unusual place. In fact, to a police station. Isn’t that
odd?”
     “Whatever for?”
     “They’ve caught the man who burgled us last spring.”
     “And Uncle’s got to give evidence? What a bore.”
     “Not altogether. We’re going to get our things back. The stolen articles have turned up and
we’ve been asked to go and collect them. A policeman came around yesterday especially to tell
us.”
     “I see. Otherwise Uncle wouldn’t have gone out as early as this.
     Normally he’d still be snoring.”
     “There’s no one quite such a lie-abed as your uncle, and if one wakes him up he gets
extremely cross. This morning, for instance, because he’d asked me to wake him up at seven,
that’s when I woke him up. And d’you know, he promptly crept inside the bed clothes and didn’t
even answer.
     Naturally, I was worried about his appointment with the police, but when I tried to wake him
up for the second time, he said something rather unkind through a sleeve of the padded bed
clothes. Really, he’s the limit.”
     “I wonder why he’s always so sleepy. Perhaps,” said his niece in almost pleasured tones,
“his nerves are shot to pieces.”
     “I don’t know, I’m sure.”
     “He does lose his temper far too easily. It surprises me that they keep him on as a teacher
at that school.”
     “Well, I’m told he’s awfully gentle at the school.”
     “Which only makes things worse. A blow-hard in the house and all thistledown at school.”
     “What d’you mean, dear?” asks my mistress.
     “Well, don’t you think it’s bad that he should act around here like the King of Hell and then
appear at school like some quaking jelly?”
     “And of course it’s not just that he’s so terribly bad tempered. He’s also an ornery man.
When one says right, he immediately says left; if one says left, then he says right. And he
never, but never, does anything that he’s been asked to do. He’s as stubborn and crank-minded
as a mule.”
     “Cantankerous, I call it. Being plain contrary is his whole-time hobby.
     For myself if I ever want him to do something, I just ask him to do the opposite. And it
always works. For instance, the other day I wanted him to buy me an umbrella. So I purposely
kept on telling him that I didn’t want one. ‘Of course you want an umbrella,’ he exploded and
promptly went and bought me one.”
     Mrs. Sneaze broke out in a womanly series of giggles and titters. “Oh, how clever you are,”
she said, “I’ll do the same in future.”
     “You certainly should. You’ll never get anything out of that old skin-flint if you don’t.”
     “The other day an insurance man called around and he tried hard to persuade your uncle to
take out an insurance policy. He pointed out this and that advantage and did his very best for
about an hour to talk your uncle around. But your obstinate, old uncle was not to be persuaded,
even though we have three children and no savings. If only he would take out even the most
modest insurance, we’d naturally all feel very much more secure. But a fat lot he cares for
things like that.”
     “Quite so. If anything should happen, you could be very awkwardly placed.” This girl
doesn’t sound like a teenager at all, but more, and most unbecomingly, like an experience-
hardened housewife.
     “It was really rather amusing to hear your uncle arguing with that wretched salesman. Your
uncle said,‘All right, perhaps I can concede the necessity of insurance. Indeed, I deduce that it
is by reason of that necessity that insurance companies exist.’Nevertheless he persisted in
maintaining that ‘nobody needs to get insured unless he’s going to die.’”
     “Did he actually say that?”
     “He did indeed. Inevitably, the salesman answered, ‘Of course, if nobody ever died, there’d
be no need for insurance companies. But human life, however durable it may sometimes seem,
is in fact a fragile and precarious thing. No man can ever know what hidden dangers menace
his tenuous existence.’ To which your uncle retorted, ‘I’ve decided not to die, so have no worry
on my account.’ Can you imagine anyone actually saying such an idiotic thing?”
     “How extremely silly! One dies even if one decides not to. Why, I myself was absolutely
determined to pass my exams, but, in fact, I failed.”
     “The insurance man said the same thing. ‘Life,’ he said, ‘can’t be controlled. If people could
prolong their lives by strength of resolution, nobody anywhere would ever leave this earth.’”
     “The insurance man makes sense to me.”
     “I certainly agree. But your uncle cannot see it. He swears he’ll never die. ‘I’ve made a
vow,’ he told that salesman with all the pride of a nincompoop, ‘never, never to die.’”
     “How very odd.”
     “Of course he’s odd, very odd indeed. He looks entirely unconcerned as he announces that,
rather than paying premiums for insurance, he prefers to hold his savings in a bank.”
     “Has he got any savings?”
     “Of course not. He just doesn’t give a damn what happens after his death.”
     “That’s very worrisome for you. I wonder what makes him so peculiar. There’s no one like
him among his friends who come here, is there?”
     “Of course there’s not. He’s unique.”
     “You should ask someone like Suzuki to give him a talking-to. If only he were as mild and
manageable as Suzuki, he would be so much easier to cope with.”
     “I understand what you mean, but Mr. Suzuki is not well thought of in this house.”
     “Everything here seems upside-down. Well, if that’s no good, what about that other person,
that person of such singular self-possession?”
     “Singleman Kidd?”
     “Yes, him.”
     “Your uncle recognizes Singleman’s superiority, but only yesterday we had Waverhouse
around here with some dreadful tales to tell of Singleman’s behavior and past history. In the
circumstances, I don’t think Singleman could be much help.”
     “But surely he could do it. He’s so generously self-possessed, such a winning personality.
The other day he gave a lecture at my school.”
     “Singleman did?”
     “Yes.”
     “Does he teach at your school?”
     “No, he’s not one of our teachers, but we invited him to give a lecture to our Women’s
Society for the Protection of Female Virtue.”
     “Was it interesting?”
     “Well, not all that interesting. But he has such a long face and he sports such a spiritual
goatee, so everyone who hears him is naturally much impressed.”
     “What sort of things did he talk about?” Mrs. Sneaze had barely finished her sentence when
the three children, presumably drawn by the sound of Yukie’s voice, came bursting noisily
across the veranda and into the living room. I imagine they had been playing outside in the open
space just beyond the bamboo fence.
     “Hurray, it’s Yukie,” shouted the two elder girls with boisterous pleasure.
     “Don’t get so excited, children,” said Mrs. Sneaze. “Come and sit down quietly. Yukie is
going to tell us an interesting story.” So saying, she shoved her sewing things away into a
corner of the room.
     “A story from Yukie?” says the eldest. “Oh, I do love stories.”
     “Will you be telling us again that tale of Click-Clack Mountain?” asks the second daughter.
     “Baby-dear a story!” shouts the baby as she rams her knee forward between her squatting
sisters. This does not mean that she wants to listen to a story. On the contrary, it means she
wants to tell one.
     “What! Baby-dear’s story yet again!” scream her laughing sisters.
     “Baby-dear, you shall tell us your story afterward,” says Mrs. Sneaze cajolingly, “after
Yukie has finished.”
      But Baby-dear is in no mood for sops or compromises. “No,” she bellows, “now!” And to
establish that she’s totally in earnest, she adds her gnomic warning of a tantrum. “Babu,” she
thundered.
      “All right, all right. Baby-dear shall start,” says Yukie placatingly.
      “What’s your story called?”
      “‘Bo-tan, Bo-tan, where you going?’”
      “Very good, and what next?”
      “I go rice field, I cut rice”
      “Aren’t you a clever one!”
      “If you tum there, rice go rotten”
      “Hey, it’s not ‘tum there,’ it’s ‘if you come there.’” One of the girls butts in with a correction.
The baby responds with her threatening roar of “Babu,” and her interrupting sister immediately
subsides. But the interruption has broken the baby’s train of remembrance so that, stuck for
words, she sits there in a glowering silence.
      “Baby-dear, is that all?” asks Yukie at her sweetest.
      The baby pondered for a moment and then exclaimed, “Don’t want fart-fart, that not nice.”
      There was a burst of unseemly laughter. “What a dreadful thing to say! Whoever’s been
teaching you that?”
      “O-san,” says the treacherous brat with an undisarming smirk.
      “How naughty of O-san to say such things,” says Mrs. Sneaze with a forced smile. Quickly
ending the matter, she turned to her niece. “Now, it’s time for Yukie’s story. You’ll listen to her,
won’t you, Baby-dear? Yes?”
      Tyrant though she is, the baby now seems to be satisfied, for she remained quiet.
      “Professor Singleman’s lecture went like this,” Yukie began at last.
      “Once upon a time a big stone image of the guardian god of children stood smack in the
middle of the place where two roads crossed.
      Unfortunately, it was a very busy place with lots of carts and horses moving along the
roads. So this big stone Jizō, interfering with the flow of traffic, was really an awful nuisance.
The people who lived in that district therefore got together and decided that the best thing to do
would be to move the big stone image to one corner of the crossroads.”
      “Is this a story of something that actually happened?” asks Mrs.
      Sneaze.
      “I don’t know. The Professor did not mention whether the tale was real or not. Anyway, it
seems that the people then began to discuss how the statue could in fact be moved. The
strongest man amongst them told them not to worry, for he could easily do the job. So off he
went to the crossroads, stripped himself to the waist and pushed and pulled at the big stone
image until the sweat poured down his body. But the Jizō did not move.”
      “It must have been made of terribly heavy stone.”
      “Indeed it was. So terribly heavy that in the end that strongest man of them all was totally
exhausted and trudged back home to sleep. So the people had another meeting and talked it
over again. This time it was the smartest man amongst them who said, ‘Let me have a go at it,’
so they let him have a go. He filled a box with sweet dumplings and put it down on the ground a
little way in front of the Jizō. ‘Jizō,’ he said, pointing to the dumpling box,‘come along here.’ For
he reckoned that the big stone fellow would be greedy enough to be lured forward in order to
get at the goodies. But the Jizō did not move. Though the clever man could see no flaw in his
style of approach, he calculated that he must have misjudged the appetites of Jizō. So he went
away and filled a gourd with saké and then came back to the crossroads with the drink-filled
gourd in one hand and a saké cup in the other. For about three hours he tried to tease the Jizō
into moving.‘Don’t you want this lovely saké?’ he kept shouting.
     ‘If you want it, come and get it! Come and drink this lovely saké. Just a step and the
gourd’s all yours.’ But the Jizō did not move.”
     “Yukie,” asks the eldest daughter, “doesn’t Mr. Jizō ever get hungry?”
     “I’d do almost anything,” observed her younger sister, “for a boxful of sweet dumplings.”
     “For the second time the clever man got nowhere. So he went away again and made
hundreds and hundreds of imitation banknotes. Standing in front of the big stone god, he
flashed his fancy money in and out of his pocket.‘I’ll bet you’d like a fistful of these bank notes,’
he remarked,
     ‘so why not come and get them?’ But even the flashing of bank notes did no good. The Jizō
did not move. He must, I think, have been quite an obstinate Jizō.”
     “Rather like your uncle,” said Mrs. Sneaze with a sniff.
     “Indeed so, the very image of my uncle. Well, in the end the clever man also gave up in
disgust. At which point along came a braggart who assured the people that their problem was
the simplest thing in the world and that he would certainly settle it for them.”
     “So what did the braggart do?”
     “Well, it was all very amusing. First, he rigged himself out in a policeman’s uniform and a
false moustache. Then he marched up to the big stone image and addressed it in a loud and
pompous voice. ‘You there,’ he bellowed,‘move along now, quietly. If you don’t move on, you’ll
find yourself in trouble. The authorities will certainly purpose the matter with the utmost rigor.’
This must all have happened long ago,” said Yukie by way of comment, “for I doubt whether
nowadays you could impress anyone by pretending to be a policeman.”
     “Quite. But did that old-time Jizō move?”
     “Of course it didn’t. It was just like Uncle.”
     “But your uncle stands very much in awe of the police.”
     “Really? Well, if the Jizō wasn’t scared by the braggart’s threatenings, they couldn’t have
been particularly frightening. Anyway, the Jizō was unimpressed and stayed where it was. The
braggart then grew deucedly angry. He stormed off home, took off his copper’s uniform,
pitched his false moustache into a rubbish bin and reappeared at the crossroads got up to look
like an extremely wealthy man. Indeed, he contorted his face to resemble the features of Baron
Iwasaki. Can you imagine anything quite so potty?”
     “What sort of face is Baron Iwasaki’s?”
     “Well, probably very proud. Toffee-nosed, you know. Anyway, saying nothing more, but
puffing a vast cigar, the braggart took no further action but to walk around and around the Jizō.”
     “Whatever for?”
     “The idea was to make the Jizō dizzy with tobacco smoke.”
     “It all sounds like some storyteller’s joke! Did he succeed in dizzying the Jizō?”
     “No, the idea didn’t work. After all, he was puffing against stone.
     Then, instead of just abandoning his pantomimes, he next appeared disguised as a prince.
What about that?”
     “As a prince? Did they have princes even in those days?”
      “They must have, for Professor Kidd said so. He said that, blasphemous as it was, this
braggart actually appeared in the trappings of a prince. I really think such conduct most
irreverent. And the man nothing but a boastful twerp!”
      “You say he appeared as a prince, but as which prince?”
      “I don’t know. Whichever prince it was, the act remains irreverent.”
      “How right you are.”
      “Well, even princely power proved useless. So, finally stumped, the braggart threw his
hand in and admitted he could do nothing with the Jizō.”
      “Served him right!”
      “Yes indeed, and, what’s more, he ought to have been jailed for his impudence. Anyway,
the people in the town were now really worried, but though they got together for a further pow-
wow, no one could be persuaded to take another crack at the problem.”
      “Is that how it all finished?”
      “No, there’s more to come. In the end, they paid whole gangs of rickshawmen and other
riff-raff to mill around the Jizō with as much hullaballoo as possible. The idea was to make
things so unbearably unpleasant that the Jizō would move on. So, taking it in turns, they
managed to keep up an incredible din by day and night.”
      “What a painful business!”
      “But even such desperate measures brought no joy, for the Jizō, too, was stubborn.”
      “So what happened?” asks Tonko eagerly.
      “Well, by now everyone was getting pretty fed up because, though they kept the racket
going for days and nights on end, the din had no effect. Only the riff-raff and the rickshawmen
enjoyed the row they made, and they of course were happy because they were getting wages
for making themselves a nuisance.”
      “What,” asked Sunko, “are wages?”
      “Wages are money.”
      “What would they do with money?”
      Yukie was flummoxed. “Well, when they have money. . .” she began and then dodged the
question first by a loud false laugh and then by telling Sunko how naughty she was. “Anyway,”
she continued, “the people just went on making their silly noises all through the day and all
through the night. Now it so happened that at that time there was an idiot boy in the district
whom they all called Daft Bamboo. He was, as the saying goes, simple. He knew nothing, and
nobody had anything to do with him. Eventually, even this simpleton noticed the terrible racket.
‘Why,’ he asked ‘are you making all that noise?’ When someone explained the situation, the idiot
boy remarked, ‘What idiots you are, trying for all these years to shift a single Jizō with such
idiotic tricks.’”
      “A remarkable speech from an idiot.’”
      “He was indeed a rather remarkable fool. Of course nobody thought he could do any good
but, since no one else had done better, why not, they said, why not let him have a go at it? So
Daft Bamboo was asked to help. He immediately agreed.‘Stop that horrible noise,’ he said,‘and
just keep quiet.’ The riff-raff and the rickshawmen were packed off somewhere out of sight, and
Daft Bamboo, as vacuous as ever, then walked up to the Jizō with utter aimlessness.”
      “Was Utter Aimlessness a special friend of Daft Bamboo?”
      Mrs. Sneaze and Yukie burst into laughter at Tonko’s curious question.
      “No, not a friend.”
     “Then, what?”
     “Well, utter aimlessness is. . . impossible to describe.”
     “‘Utter aimlessness’ means ‘impossible to describe’?”
     “No, that’s not it. Utter aimlessness means. . .”
     “Yes?”
     “You know Mr. Sampei, don’t you?”
     “Yes, he’s the one who gave us yams.”
     “Well, utter aimlessness means someone like Mr. Sampei.”
     “Is Mr. Sampei an utter aimlessness?”
     “Yes, more or less. . . Now, Daft Bamboo ambled up to the Jizō with his hands in his
pockets and said, ‘Mr. Jizō, the people in this town would like you to move. Would you be so
kind as to do so?’ And the Jizō promptly replied,‘Of course I’ll do so. Why ever didn’t they come
and ask before?’With that he slowly moved away to a corner of the crossroads.”
     “What a peculiar statue!”
     “Then the lecture started.”
     “Oh! Is there more to come?”
     “Most certainly. Professor Kidd went on to say that he had opened his address to the
women’s meeting with that particular story because it illustrated a point he had in mind.‘If I may
take the liberty of saying so,’
     he said, ‘whenever women do something, they are prone to tackle it in a roundabout way
instead of coming straight to the point. Admittedly, it is not solely women who beat about the
bush. In these so-called enlightened days, debilitated by the poisons of Western civilization,
even men have become somewhat effeminate. There are, alas, all too many now devoting their
time and effort to an imitation of Western customs in the totally mistaken conviction that aping
foreigners is the proper occupation of a gentleman. Such persons are, of course, deformed,
for, by their efforts to conform with alien ways, they deform themselves. They deserve no
further comment. However, I would wish you ladies to reflect upon the tale I’ve told today so
that, as occasion may arise, you, too, will act with the same clear-hearted honesty as was
shown by Daft Bamboo. For if all ladies did so act, there can be no doubt that one-third of the
abominable discords between husbands and wives and between wives and their mothers-in-law
would simply disappear. Human beings are, alas, so made that the more they indulge in secret
schemes, schemes whose very secrecy breeds evil, the deeper they drive the wellsprings of
their own unhappiness. And the specific reason why so many ladies are so much less happy
than the average man is precisely because ladies over indulge themselves in secret schemes.
Please,’ he begged us as his lecture ended, ‘turn yourselves into Daft Bamboos.’”
     “Did he, indeed! Well,Yukie, are you planning to follow his advice?”
     “No fear! Turn myself into a Daft Bamboo! That’s the last thing I would do. Miss Goldfield,
too, she was very angry. She said the lecture was damned rude.”
     “Miss Goldfield? The girl who lives just round the corner?”
     “Yes. Little Miss Popinjay in person.”
     “Does she go to the same school as you,Yukie?”
     “No, she just came to hear the lecture because it was a Women’s Society meeting. She
certainly dresses up to the nines. Really astonishing.”
     “They say she’s very good looking. Is it true?”
     “She’s nothing special, in my opinion. Certainly not the knock-out that she fancies herself.
Almost any girl would look good under that much make-up.”
     “So if you,Yukie, daubed on the same amount of make-up, you’d look twice as pretty as
she does? Right?”
     “What a thing to say! But truly, Auntie, she puts on far too much.
     Rich she may be, but really she overdoes it.”
     “Well, it’s pleasant to be rich, even if one does consequently overdo the paints and powder.
Wouldn’t you agree?”
     “Yes, perhaps you’re right. But if anyone needs to take lessons from Daft Bamboo, that
Goldfield girl’s the one. She is so terribly stuck-up.
     Only the other day she was swanking to all the other girls that some poet or other had just
dedicated to her a collection of his new-style poetry.”
     “That was probably Mr. Beauchamp.”
     “Really? He must be a bit flighty.”
     “Oh no, Mr. Beauchamp is very sober-minded man. He would think such a gesture the most
natural thing in the world.”
     “A man like that shouldn’t be allowed to. . . Actually there is another amusing thing. It
seems that somebody recently sent her a love letter.”
     “How disgusting! Whoever did such a thing?”
     “Apparently nobody knows who sent it.”
     “Wasn’t there a name?”
     “It was signed, but with a name that no one’s ever heard of. And it was a very, very long
letter, about a yard long, full of the weirdest things.
     For instance, it said, ‘I love you in the same way that a saintly man loves God.’ It said,
‘Gladly for your sake would I die like a lamb sacrificed on the altar; for me, so to be
slaughtered would be the greatest of all honors.’ It said, ‘My heart is shaped like a triangle in
the center of which, like a bull’s eye pierced by a blowgun dart, is Cupid’s arrow stuck!’”
     “Is all that meant to be serious?”
     “It would seem to be. Three of my own friends have actually seen the letter.”
     “I do think she’s awful to go around showing people such a letter.
     Since she intends to marry Mr. Coldmoon, she could get into trouble if that sort of story
begins to get around.”
     “On the contrary, she’d be terribly pleased if everyone should know about it. I’m sure she’d
say you’d be welcome to pass the news to Mr.
     Coldmoon when next he pays a visit. I don’t suppose he’s heard about it yet. Or do you
think he has?”
     “Probably not, since he spends his entire time polishing little glass beads at the university.”
     “I wonder if Mr. Coldmoon really intends to marry that girl. Poor man!”
     “Why? With all her money she’ll be of real help to him on some rainy day in the future. So
why should you think he’s doing badly?”
     “Auntie, you are so vulgar, always talking about money, money, money. Surely love is more
important than money. Without love no real relation between husband and wife is possible.”
     “Indeed? Then tell me, Yukie, what sort of man do you intend to marry?”
     “How should I know? I’ve no one in mind.”
     Though she had hardly understood a word of what was being said, my master’s eldest
daughter had listened attentively while her mother and Cousin Yukie launched out upon their
earnest discussion of the question of marriage. But suddenly, out of the blue, the little girl
opened her mouth. “I,” she announced, “would also like to get married.” Though Yukie is herself
so brimming with youthful ardor that she could well be expected to sympathize with Tonko’s
feelings, she was in fact struck dumb by such reckless lust. Mrs. Sneaze, however, took it all in
her stride and, smiling at her daughter, simply asked, “To whom?”
     “Well, shall I tell you? I want to marry Yasukuni Shrine. But I don’t like crossing Suido-
Bridge, so I’m wondering what to do.”
     Both Mrs. Sneaze and Yukie were distinctly taken aback by this unexpected declaration of
an ambition to marry the shrine dedicated to the departed spirits of those who’d fallen in war
for the sake of the father-land. Words failed them, and all they could do was shake with
laughter.
     They were still laughing when the second daughter said to her eldest sister. “So you’d like
to marry Yasukuni Shrine? Well, so would I. I’d love it. Let’s both do just that. Come on. No? All
right then, if you won’t join me, I’ll take a rickshaw and go get married by myself ”
     “Babu go, too,” piped up the smallest of my master’s daughters.
     Indeed, such a triple marrying-off would suit him very well.
     At that moment there came the sound of a rickshaw stopping in front of the house, followed
by the lively voice of a rickshawman announcing the arrival of my master. It would seem he has
got back safely from the police station. Leaving the rickshawman to hand over a large parcel to
the maid, my master came into the living room with an air of perfect composure. Greeting his
niece with a friendly, “Ah, so there you are,” he flung down beside the family’s famous oblong
brazier some bottle shaped object he’d brought back. An object of that shape is not necessarily
a bottle, and it certainly doesn’t look much like a vase. Being so odd a specimen of
earthenware, for the time being I’ll content myself with calling it a bottle shaped object.
     “What a peculiar bottle! Did you bring it back from the police station?” asks Yukie, as she
stands it up on its base.
     Glancing at his niece, my master proudly comments, “Isn’t it a beautiful shape?”
     “A beautiful shape? That thing? I don’t think it beautiful at all. What ever made you bring
home such an awful oil jar?”
     “How could this treasure possibly be an oil jar! What a vulgar comment! You’re hopeless.”
     “What is it then?”
     “A vase.”
     “For a vase, its mouth is too small and its body far too wide.”
     “That’s exactly why it’s so remarkable. You have absolutely no artistic taste. Almost as bad
as your aunt.” Holding the oil jar up toward the paper-window, he stands and gazes at it.
     “So, I have no artistic sense. I see. I certainly wouldn’t come home from a police station
bearing an oil jar as a present. Auntie, what do you think?”
     Her aunt is far too engrossed to be bothered. She has opened the parcel and is now
frantically checking the goods.
     “Gracious me! Burglars seem to be making progress. All these things have been washed
and ironed. Just look, dear,” she says.
     “Who said I was given an oil jar at the police station? The fact is that I got so bored with
waiting that I went out for a walk and, while I was walking, I saw this splendid vessel in a shop
and picked it up for a song.
     You, of course, wouldn’t see it, but it’s a rare object.”
      “It’s too rare. And tell me, where was it that you walked about?”
      “Where? Around Nihon-zutsumi, of course. I also visited Yoshiwara.
      It’s quite a lively place, that. Have you ever seen the iron gate? I bet you haven’t.”
      “Nothing would ever induce me to go and look at it. I have no cause to traipse around a
brothel area like Yoshiwara. How could you, a teacher, go to such a place? I am deeply
shocked. What d’you say, Auntie? Auntie!”
      “Yes, dear. I rather think there’s something missing. Is this the lot?”
      “The only item missing is the yams. They instructed me to be there by nine o’clock and then
they kept me waiting until eleven. It’s outrageous. The Japanese police are plainly no good at
all.”
      “The Japanese police may be no good, but trotting about in Yoshiwara is very decidedly
worse. If you’re found out, you’ll get the sack. Won’t he, Auntie?”
      “Yes, probably. My dear,” she went on turning to her husband, “the lining of my obi is gone.
I knew there was something missing.”
      “What’s so serious about an obi lining? Just forget it. Think about me.
      For three long hours they kept me waiting. A whole half-day of my precious time completely
wasted.” My master has now changed into Japanese clothes and, leaning against the brazier,
sits and gawps entrancedly at his ghastly oil jar. His wife, recovering rapidly from her loss,
replaces the returned articles in a cupboard and comes back to her seat.
      “Auntie,” says the persistent Yukie, “he says this oil jar is a rare object.
      Don’t you think it dirty?”
      “You bought that thing in Yoshiwara? Really!”
      “What do you mean by ‘Really!’? As if you understand anything!”
      “But surely, a jar like that! You could find one anywhere without cavorting off to Yoshiwara.”
      “That’s just where you’re wrong. This isn’t an object you could find any where.”
      “Uncle does take after that stone Jizō, doesn’t he?”
      “None of your cheek, now. The trouble with college girls today is their far too saucy
tongues. You’d do better to spend time reading the Proper Conduct of a Woman.”
      “Uncle, it’s a fact, isn’t it, that you don’t like insurance policies? But tell me, which do you
dislike more, college girls or insurance policies?”
      “I do not dislike insurance policies. Insurance is a necessary thing.
      Anyone who gives even half a thought to the future is bound to take out a policy. But
college girls are good-for-nothings.”
      “I don’t care if I am a good-for-nothing. But you can talk! You aren’t even insured!”
      “As of next month, I shall be.”
      “Are you sure?”
      “Of course I’m sure.”
      “Oh, you shouldn’t. It’s silly to get insured. It would be much better to spend the premium
money on something else. Don’t you agree, Auntie?”
      Mrs. Sneaze grins, but my master, looking serious, retorts, “You only say such
irresponsible things because you imagine you’re going to go on living until you’re a hundred
years old. Even two hundred. But when you’ve grown a little more mature, you’ll come to realize
the necessity of insurance. From next month, I shall definitely insure myself.”
      “Oh, well. Can’t be helped then. Actually, if you can afford to throw away cash on an
umbrella as you did the other day, you might as well waste your wealth on insuring yourself.
You bought it for me even though I kept saying I didn’t want it.”
     “You really didn’t want it?”
     “No. I most certainly did not want any umbrella.”
     “Then you can give it back to me. Tonko needs one badly, so I’ll give it to her. Have you
brought it with you today?”
     “But that’s really mean. How could you! It’s terrible to make me give it back after you’ve
bought it for me.”
     “I asked you to return it only because you clearly stated that you didn’t want it. There’s
nothing terrible about that.”
     “It’s true I don’t need it. But you’re still terrible.”
     “What nonsense you do talk. You say you don’t want it, so I ask you to return it. Why
should that be terrible?”
     “But. . .”
     “But what?”
     “But that’s terrible.”
     “You’re making no sense at all, just repeating the same irrational assertion.”
     “Uncle, you too are repeating the same thing.”
     “I can’t help that if you initiate the repetitions. You did definitely say you didn’t want it.”
     “Yes, I did say that. And it’s true that I don’t need it. But I don’t like to return it.”
     “Well, I am surprised. You’re not only irrational and unreasonable but downright obstinate. A
truly hopeless case. Don’t they teach you logic at your school?”
     “Oh, I don’t care. I am uneducated anyway. Say anything you like about me! But to ask me
to return my own thing. . . Even a stranger wouldn’t make such a heartless request. You could
learn a thing or two from poor old Daft Bamboo.’
     “From whom?”
     “I mean you should be more honest and frank.”
     “You’re a very stupid girl and uncommonly obstinate. That’s why you fail to pass your
exams.”
     “Even if I do fail, I shan’t ask you to pay my school fees. So there!” At this point Yukie
appeared to be shaken by uncontrollable emotions. Tears gushed out of her eyes and, pouring
down her cheeks, fell to stain her purple dress.
     My master sat there stupefied. As though he believed it might help him understand what
mental processes could produce such copious tears, he sat and blankly stared, sometimes at
the top of her skirt, sometimes, at her down-turned face. Just then, O-san appeared at the
door where, squatting with her hands spread out on the matting, she announced, “There is a
visitor, Sir.”
     “Who is it?” asks my master.
     “A student from your school,” answers O-san, casting a sharp sidelong glance at Yukie’s
tear-stained face.
     My master took himself off to the drawing room. In pursuit of further material for this book,
in particular as it might bear upon my study of the human animal, I sneaked out after him by
way of the veranda. If one is to make a worthwhile study of mankind, it is vital to seize upon
eventful moments. At ordinary times, most human beings are wearisomely ordinary;
depressingly banal in appearance and deadly boring in their conversation. However, at certain
moments, by some peculiar, almost supernatural, process their normal triviality can be
transformed into something so weird and wonderful that no feline scholar of their species can
afford to miss any occasion when that transformation seems likely to take place. Yukie’s
sudden deluge of tears was a very good example of this phenomenon. Though Yukie
possesses an incomprehensible and unfathomable mind, she gave no evidence of it in her
chattering with Mrs. Sneaze. However, as soon as my master appeared and flung his filthy oil
jar into the situation,Yukie was instantly transfigured.
     Like some sleeping dragon startled into its draconian reality by torrents of water pumped
upon it by some idiotic fire engine, unbelievably Yukie suddenly revealed the depths of her
wonderfully devious, wonderfully beautiful, wonderfully wondrous character in all its exquisite
subtlety.
     Such wonderful characteristics are, in fact, common among women throughout the world,
and it is regrettable that women so seldom make them manifest. On reflection, it would
perhaps be more accurate to say that, while these characteristics do continuously manifest
themselves, they rarely appear in such uninhibited form, so purely, openly and unconstrainedly,
as they did in Yukie’s outburst. No doubt I owe it to my master—that commendably crotchety
crank who harbors no ill-heartedness when he strokes my fur in the wrong direction—that I
have been privileged to witness such a revelation of the female soul. As I tag along through life
behind him, wherever we go he provokes more drama than any of the protagonists ever realize.
I am fortunate to be the cat of such a man, for, thanks to him, my short cat’s life is crammed
with incident.
     Now, who, I wonder, is the visitor awaiting us?
     It proved to be a schoolboy of about the same age as Yukie, perhaps sixteen or seventeen.
His hair is cropped so short that the skin of his skull, a truly massive skull, shines through it.
With a dumpy nose in the middle of his face, he sits despondently waiting in a corner of the
room.
     Apart from his enormous skull, there is nothing remarkable in his features. However, since
that head looks huge in its virtually hairless state, it will certainly catch the eye when he lets his
hair grow long as does my master. It is one of my master’s private theories that heads so vast
are always addled. He may, of course, be right, but heads of such Napoleonic grandeur remain
indeed impressive. The lad’s kimono, like that of any houseboy, is made out of common, dark
blue cotton with patterns splashed in white. I cannot identify the style of the pattern, possibly
Satsuma, possibly Kurume, even perhaps plain Iyo, but he is undoubtedly wearing a lined
kimono of dark blue cotton patterned with splotches of white. Its sleeves seem somewhat
short, and he would appear to be wearing neither a shirt nor any underwear. I understand that it
is currently considered very stylish, positively dandified, to go about in a lined kimono without
underwear and even without socks, but this particular young man, far from seeming stylish,
gives a strong impression of extreme shabbiness. In particular I notice that, barefooted like our
recent burglar, he has marked the matting with three dirty footprints and now, doing his best to
look respectful and certainly looking ill at ease, sits uncomfortably upon the fourth of them. It is
in no way extraordinary to see respectable persons behaving respectfully, but when some wild,
young hooligan with his skinhead hairstyle and his too-small clothing seats himself in a reverent
posture, the effect is distinctly incongruous. Creatures who have the effrontery even to be
proud of their insolent refusal to bow to their teachers when they meet them in the street must
find it very painful to sit up properly like anyone else, even for so little as half an hour.
Moreover, since this particular yahoo is actually trying to behave as if he were a gentleman by
birth, a man of natural modesty and of cultivated virtue, the comic incompetence of his
performance must surely add to his sufferings. I marvel at the agonizing self-control by which a
lout so boisterous both in the classroom and on the playground can bring himself to endure such
a laughable charade. It is pitiful but, at the same time, funny. In confrontations of this sort,
however stupid my master may be, he still seems to carry rather more weight than any
individual pupil. Indeed, my master must be feeling pretty pleased with himself.
      The saying goes that even motes of dust, if enough of them pile up, will make a mountain.
One solitary schoolboy may well be insignificant, but schoolboys ganged together can be a
formidable force, capable of agitating for the expulsion of a teacher, even of going on strike.
Just as cowards grow aggressive under the spur of grog, so may students emboldened by
mere numbers into stirring up a riot be regarded as having lost their senses by becoming
intoxicated with people. How else can one explain how my master, who, however antiquated
and decrepit he may be, is nevertheless a teacher, could in his own schoolroom have been
reduced to an object of derision by this scruffy little runt now making himself small, dejected
perhaps rather than truly humbled, in a corner of our room? Even so, l find it hard to credit that
so miserable a snivelard could ever have dared to rag or mock my master.
      That noble figure, shoving a cushion toward the drooping crophead, bade him sit on it, but
the latter, though he managed to mumble a nervous “thank you,” made no move at all. It’s
quaint to see a living being, even this bighead, sitting blankly with a partly faded cushion
rammed up against his knees. The cushion, of course, says nothing, not even, “Sit on me.” But
cushions are for sitting on. Mrs. Sneaze didn’t go to a market stall and buy this particular
cushion in order that it should be looked at.
      It follows that anyone who declines to sit on the cushion is, in effect, casting a slur on its
cushionly good name. Indeed, when my master has specifically offered the cushion for sitting
upon, a refusal to do so extends the insult to the cushion into a slight upon my master. This
crophead glaring at the cushion and thereby slighting my master does not, of course, have any
personal dislike for the cushion itself. As a matter of fact, the only other occasion in his life
when he sat in a civilized manner was during the memorial rites for his grandfather, so his
present sally into decorum is bringing on pins and needles in his feet while his toes, excruciated
by the pressures of propriety, have long been signaling blue murder. Nevertheless, the clot
won’t sit on the cushion. He will not do so, though the cushion, clearly embarrassed by the
situation, yearns to be sat on. Even though my master requests he use the cushion, still this oaf
declines it. He is a very wearisome young man. If he can be so overweeningly modest on a
visit, he ought to trot out a little more of his precious modesty when roistering around with his
cronies in the schoolroom and at his lodgings. He positively reeks of decorous reserve when it’s
totally uncalled for; yet, when just a touch of self-depreciation would hardly come amiss, he’s
raucous, coarse, and cocky. What an irksome, cross-grained, crophead this young rascal is.
      At that moment the sliding door behind him quietly slid open and Yukie came in formally to
place a cup of tea before the silent youth. In normal circumstances, he would have greeted the
appearance of such refreshment with jeering catcalls about poor, old Savage Tea, but today,
already wilting under my master’s immediate presence, he suffers further agony as a prissily
conducted young lady serves him tea with all that affected ceremoniality which has only recently
been drilled into her at school. As Yukie closed the sliding door she allowed herself, safe behind
the young man’s back, to break into a broad grain. Which shows that a female is remarkably
more self-possessed than a male of the same age. Indeed,Yukie very evidently has far more
spirit to her than this cushion shunning twit. Her bare-faced grin is all the more remarkable when
one remembers that, only a few minutes ago, tears of resentment were pouring down her
cheeks.
     After Yukie had left, a long silence fell. Eventually my master, feeling that the interview was
in danger of becoming some kind of dour religious exercise, took the initiative and opened his
mouth.
     “Your name. . . what did you say it was?”
     “Yore.”
     “Yore? Yore and what else? What’s your first name?”
     “Lancelot.”
     “Lancelot Yore. . . I see. Quite a resounding name. Certainly not modern, a somewhat old-
fashioned name. You are in your fourth year, aren’t you?”
     “No.”
     “Your third year?”
     “No, my second year.”
     “And in Class A?”
     “In Class B.”
     “In B? Then, you’re in my class. I see.” My master appeared impressed. He had taken note
of this particularly monstrous head since its bearer first joined the school, and had recognized it
immediately. In fact, that head has so long and so deeply impressed my master that, every so
often, he actually dreams about it. However, being of a totally impractical nature, he had never
connected that extraordinary head with that odd old-fashioned name, and had somehow failed
to connect either with his own second-year Class B. Consequently, when he realized that the
impressive head that haunted his dreams actually belonged to one of his own pupils, he was
genuinely startled. All the more so since he cannot imagine why this big headed and oddly
named member of his own class should now have come to see him. My master is unpopular,
and hardly a single schoolboy ever comes near him, even at the New Year. As a matter of fact,
this Lancelot Yore is the very first such visitor, and my master is understandably puzzled by his
call. It is inconceivable that the visit could be purely social, for how could my master be of the
faintest interest to any of his pupils? It seems equally inconceivable that a boy of this kind could
need advice about his personal affairs. Of course, it is just conceivable that Lancelot Yore might
come around to urge my master into resigning, but in such a case one would expect him to be,
if not blatantly aggressive, at least defiant. My master, unable to make heads or tails of the
situation, is at a complete loss and, to judge by his appearance, it would seem that Lancelot
Yore is himself by no means certain why he has made his visit. In the end my master was
driven to asking point-blank questions.
     “Have you come here for a chat?”
     “No, not for that.”
     “Then you have something to tell me?”
     “Yes.”
     “About school?”
     “Yes, I wanted to tell you something about. . .”
     “What is it? Tell me.”
     “Right, then.”
     Lancelot lowers his eyes and says nothing. Normally, considered as a second-year student
at middle school, Lancelot is talkative. Though his brain is undeveloped in comparison with his
skull, he expresses himself rather more effectively than most of his fellow students in Class B.
In fact, it was he who recently made my master look rather a fool by asking him how to
translate “Columbus” into Japanese. That such a tricky questioner should be as reluctant to
start speaking as some stammering princess suggests that something very weird must be
involved.
     Hesitation so prolonged and so entirely out of character cannot possibly be due to
modesty. Even my simple master thought the matter really rather odd.
     “If you have something to say, go ahead and say it. Why do you hesitate?”
     “It’s a bit difficult to explain. . .”
     “Difficult?” says my master peering across to study Lancelot’s face.
     But his visitor still sits with his eyes lowered, and my master finds it impossible to read
anything from their expression. Changing his tone of voice, he added, “Don’t worry. Tell me
anything you like. Nobody else is listening, and I won’t pass on a single word to anyone.”
     “Could I really tell you?” Lancelot is still wavering.
     “Why not?” says my master, taking a sort of plunge.
     “All right, I’ll tell you.”Abruptly lifting up his close-cropped head the boy glanced diffidently at
my master. His eyes are triangular in shape.
     My master puffed out his cheeks with cigarette smoke and, slowly expelling it, looked at his
visitor sideways.
     “Well, actually. . . things have become awkward. . .”
     “What things?”
     “Well, it’s all terribly awkward, and that’s why I’ve come.”
     “Yes, but what is it that you find so awkward?”
     “I really didn’t mean to do such a thing, but as Hamada urged and begged me to lend it. . .”
     “When you say Hamada, do you mean Hamada Heisuke?”
     “Yes.”
     “Did you lend him money for board and lodging?”
     “Oh, no, I didn’t lend him that.”
     “Then, what did you lend him?”
     “I lent him my name.”
     “Whatever was he doing borrowing your name?”
     “He sent a love letter.”
     “He sent what?”
     “I explained I’d rather do the posting than the lending of my name.”
     “You’re not making much sense. Who did what anyway?”
     “A love letter was sent.”
     “A love letter? To whom?”
     “As I said, it’s so difficult to tell you.”
     “You mean you’ve sent a love letter to some woman? Is that it?”
     “No, it wasn’t me.”
     “Hamada sent it?”
     “It wasn’t Hamada either.”
     “Then who did send it?”
     “That’s not known.”
     “None of this makes sense. Did no one send it?”
     “Only the name is mine.”
     “Only the name is yours? I still don’t understand. You’ll have to explain what’s happened
clearly and logically. In the first place, who actually received the love letter?”
     “A girl named Goldfield who lives just round the corner.”
     “Goldfield? The businessman?”
     “Yes, his daughter.”
     “And what do you mean when you say you lent only your name?”
     “Because that girl is such a dolled-up and conceited pinhead, we decided to send her a
love letter. Hamada said it had to be signed. But when I told him to sign it himself, he argued
that his name wasn’t sufficiently interesting, that Lancelot Yore would be very much more
impressive. So I ended up by lending my name.”
     “And do you know the girl? Are you friends?”
     “Friends? Of course not. I’ve never set eyes on her.”
     “How very imprudent! Fancy sending a love letter to someone you’ve never even seen!
What made you do such a thing?”
     “Well, everyone said she was stuck-up and pompous, so we thought we’d make a fool of
her.”
     “That’s even more rash! So you sent the letter clearly signed with your name?”
     “Yes. The letter itself was written by Hamada. I lent my name, and Endo took it round to
her house at night and stuck it in the letter box.”
     “Then all three of you are jointly responsible?”
     “Yes, but afterward, when I thought about being found out and possibly expelled from
school, I got so worried that I haven’t been able to sleep for the last two or three nights. That’s
why I’m not my usual self.”
     “It’s a quite unbelievably stupid thing you’ve done. Tell me, when you signed that letter did
you give the school’s address?”
     “No, of course I made no mention of the school.”
     “Well, that’s something. If you had and it ever came out, the good name of our school
would be disgraced.”
     “Do you think I’ll be expelled?”
     “Well, I don’t know. . .”
     “My father is very strict and my mother is only a stepmother, so if anything happened such
as being expelled, I’d really be in the soup. Do you reckon I’ll get expelled?”
     “You must understand, you shouldn’t have done a thing like that.”
     “I didn’t mean to really, but somehow I just did. Couldn’t you save me from being expelled?”
With the tears running down his face, the pathetic Lancelot implores my master’s help.
     For quite some time behind the sliding door Mrs. Sneaze and her niece have been
convulsed with silent giggles. My master, doggedly maintaining an air of importance, keeps on
repeating his, “Well, I don’t know.” Altogether a facinating experience.
     It is possible that some of you human beings might, and very reasonably, ask me what I
find so fascinating about it. For every living being, man or animal, the most important thing in
this world is to know one’s own self. Other things being equal, a human being that truly knows
himself is more to be respected than a similarly enlightened cat. Should the humans of my
acquaintance ever achieve such self-awareness, I would immediately abandon, as unjustifiedly
heartless, this somewhat snide account of their species as I know them. However, just as few
human beings actually know the size of their own noses, even fewer know the nature of their
own selves, for if they did, they would not need to pose such a question to a mere cat whom
they normally regard, even disregard, with contempt. Thus, though human beings are always
enormously pleased with themselves, they usually lack that self-perception which, and which
alone, might justify their seeing themselves, and their boasting of it wherever they go, as the
lords of all creation. To top things off, they display a brazenly calm conviction in their role which
is positively laughable. For there they are, making a great nuisance of themselves with their
fussing entreaties to be taught where to find their own fool noses, while at the same time
strutting around with placards on their backs declaring their claim to be lords of creation. Would
common logic or even common sense lead any such patently loony human being to resign his
claim to universal lordship? Not on your life! Every idiot specimen would sooner die than
surrender his share in the fantasy of human importance. Any creature that behaves with such
blatant inconsistency and yet contrives never to recognize the least minim of self-contradiction
in its behavior is, of course, funny. But since the human animal is indeed funny, it follows that
the creature is a fool.
     The foregoing events occurred precisely as I have recorded them and, as external realities,
they left their quaint, little ripples on the stream of time. But in this particular case it was not
their manifested conduct which made my master,Yukie, and Yore strike me as amusing. What
tickled me was the differing quality of reaction in their inmost hearts, which the same external
events evoked in these several persons. First of all, my master’s heart is rather cold, and so
was his reaction to these happenings. However strictly Yore’s harsh father may treat the boy,
however hurtfully his stepmother may pick on him, my master’s heart would not be moved. How
could it be? Yore’s possible expulsion from school does not raise any of the issues that would
be involved if my master were dismissed. Of course, if all the pupils, nearly a thousand of them,
were simultaneously expelled, then the teachers might find it hard to earn a living: but whatever
fate befalls this wretched single pupil, the daily course of my master’s own life will be totally
unaffected. Obviously, where there is no self-interest there is not going to be much sympathy.
     It is just not natural to knit one’s brows, to blow one’s nose, or to draw great sighs over the
misfortunes of complete strangers. I simply do not believe the human animal is capable of
showing such understanding and compassion. People sometimes squeeze out a few tears or
try looking sorry as a kind of social obligation, a sort of tax-payment due in acknowledgement
of having been born into a community. But such gestures are never heart felt, and their effective
performance, like any other act of chicanery, does in fact demand a high degree of skill.
Persons who perform these trickeries most artfully are regarded as men of strong artistic
feelings and earn the deepest respect of their less-gifted fellows.
     It follows, of course, that those who are most highly esteemed are those most morally
dubious, an axiom which can easily be proved by putting it to the test. My master, being
extremely ham-handed in matters of this kind, commands not the least respect and, having no
hope of winning respect by crafty misrepresentation of his true feelings, is quite open in
expressing his inner cold-heartedness. The sincerity of his indifference emerges very clearly
from the way in which he fobs off poor young Yore’s repeated pleas for help with repetitions of
the same old formulae: “Well, I don’t know” and “Hmm, I wonder.” I hasten to comment that I
trust my readers will not begin to dislike so good a man as my master just because he happens
to be cold-hearted. Coldness is the inborn natural condition of the human heart, and the man
who does not hide that fact is honest. If in circumstances such as I’ve described, you really are
expecting something more than cold-heartedness, then I can only say that you have sadly
overestimated the worth of humankind.
     When even mere honesty is in notably short supply, it would be absolutely ridiculous to
expect displays of magnanimity. Or do you seriously believe that the Eight Good Men have
stepped out of the pages of Bakin’s silly novel in order to take up residence in our
neighborhood?
     So much for my master. Let us now consider his womenfolk tittering away together in the
living room. They, in fact, have gone a stage beyond the pure indifference of my master and,
naturally adapted as they are to the comic and the grotesque, are thoroughly enjoying
themselves. These females regard the matter of the love letter, a matter of excruciating
concern to that miserable crophead, as a gift from a kindly heaven. There is no particular
reason why they regard it as a blessing. It just seems like one to them. However, if one
analyzes their mirth, the simple fact is that they are glad that Yore’s in trouble. Ask any female
whether she finds it amusing, even a cause for outright laughter, when other people are in
trouble, and she will either call you mad or affect to have been deliberately insulted by a
question so demeaning to the dignity of her sex. It may well be true that she feels she’s been
insulted, but it is also true that she laughs at people in trouble. The reality of this ladylike
position is that, inasmuch as the lady intends to do something that would impugn her character,
no decent person should draw attention to the fact.
     Correspondingly, the gentleman’s position is to acknowledge that he steals but to insist that
nobody should call him immoral because an accusation of immorality would involve a stain on
his character, an insult to his good name. Women are quite clever: they think logically. If one
has the ill luck to be born a human being, one must prepare oneself not to be distressed that
other people will not so much as turn to look when you are being kicked and beaten up. And not
just that. One must learn to think it a pleasure to be spat upon, shat upon, and then held up to
be laughed at. If one cannot learn these simple lessons, there is no chance of becoming a
friend of such clever creatures as women. By an understandable error of judgement the
luckless Lancelot Yore has made a sad mistake and is now greatly humiliated. He might
possibly feel that it is uncivilized to snigger at him behind his back when he is thus humiliated,
but any such feeling on his part would simply be a demonstration of pure childishness. I
understand that women call it narrow-mindedness if one gets angry with persons who commit a
breach of etiquette. So, unless young Yore is prepared to acquire that further humiliation, he’d
best belt up.
     Finally, I will offer a brief analysis of Yore’s own inward feelings. That infantile suppliant is a
living lump of quivering anxiety. Just as Napoleon’s massive head was bulgy with ambitions, so
Yore’s gurt skull is bursting with anxiety. The occasional puppylike quivering of his pudgy nose
betrays that this inner distress has forced a connection with his nasal nerves so that, by the
nastiest of reflex actions, he twitches without knowing it. Now for several days he has been at
the end of his tether, going around with a lump in his stomach as though he’d swallowed a
cannon ball. Finally, at his wits’ end and in the extremity of his desperation, he has come to
humble his head before a teacher he most cordially dislikes. I imagine the addled thinking
behind this desperate act was that, since teachers are supposed to look after their pupils,
perhaps even the loathed Sneaze might somehow help him. Lost in the miasma of his inner
agony is any recollection of his habitual ragging of my master; forgotten, too, is the fact that he
spent his witless days in egging on his fellow hooligans to hoot and mock old Savage Tea. He
seems to believe that, however much he’s made a nuisance of himself he’s actually entitled to
his teacher’s help for the single reason that he happens to be a member of that teacher’s class.
He is indeed a very simple soul. My master did not choose the class he teaches: he was
directed to that work by order of the headmaster. I am reminded of that bowler hat of
Waverhouse’s uncle. It was no more than a bowler hat in name. The idea of my master as a
teacher who is also the mentor of his pupils is equally unreal. Teacher, sneacher. A name
means nothing. If it did, any marriage broker would by now have been able to interest some
aspiring bachelor in a girl with a name as beautiful as that snow river name of Yukie’s. The
dismal Yore is not only daftly egocentric but, daftly overestimating human kindliness, assumes
that his fellow creatures are under some form of obligation to be nice to him. I’m sure he has
never dreamt that he might be laughed at, so at least he’s learning some useful home truths
about his species from his visit to the home of the “person in charge.” As a result, he will
himself become more truly human. His heart, benignly chilled, will grow indifferent to other
people’s troubles and, in time, he’ll even learn to jeer at the distressed. The world will come to
swarm with little Yores, all doing their best to stretch themselves into full-blown Goldfields. For
the lad’s sake, I do hope he learns his lesson quickly and grows up soon into his full humanity.
Otherwise, no matter how hard he worries, no matter how bitterly he repents, no matter how
fervently his heart may yearn to be reformed, he can never so much as hope to be able to
achieve the spectacular success of that model of humanity, the highly respected Goldfield. On
the contrary, he will be banished from human society. Compared with that, expulsion from some
piddling middle school would be as nothing.
     I was idly amusing myself with these reflections when the sliding door from the hall was
roughly jerked aside and half a face suddenly appeared at the opening. My master was
mumbling, “Well, I really don’t know,” when this half-face called his name. He wrenched his
head around to find a shining segment of Avalon Coldmoon beaming down upon him.
     “Why, hello,” says my master making no move to get up,“come along in.”
     “Aren’t you busy with a visitor?” the visible half of Coldmoon asks politely.
     “Never mind about that. Come on in.”
     “Actually, I’ve called to ask you to come out with me.”
     “Where to? Akasaka once again? I’ve had enough of that district. You made me walk so
much the other day that my legs are still quite stiff.”
     “It will be all right today. Come on out and give those legs a stretch.”
     “Where would we go? Look, don’t just stand there. Come along in.”
     “My idea is that we should go to the zoo and hear their tiger roar.”
     “How dreary. I say, old man, do come in if only for a few minutes.”
     Coldmoon evidently came to the conclusion that he would not succeed by negotiating from
a distance so, reluctantly removing his shoes, he slouched into the room. As usual, he is
wearing gray trousers with patches on the seat. These patches, he is always telling us, are not
there either because the trousers are old or because his bottom is too heavy. The reason is
that he has just started to learn how to ride a bicycle, and the patches are needed to resist the
extra friction involved. Greeting Yore with a nod and a brief hello, he sits down on the veranda
side of the room. He has, of course, no idea that he is now sitting down with a direct rival in the
lists of love, with the very person who has sent a love letter to that damsel now regarded by all
and sundry as the future Mrs. Coldmoon.
     “There’s nothing particularly interesting about a tiger’s roar,” observed my master.
     “Well, not just at this exact moment. But my idea is that we should walk about for a bit and
then go on to the zoo around eleven.”
     “So?”
     “By then, the old trees in the park will be darkly frightening like a silent forest.”
     “Well, possibly. Certainly, it will be a little more deserted than by daytime.”
     “We’ll follow a path as thickly wooded as possible, one where even in daytime few people
pass. Then, before you know it, we’ll find ourselves thinking we’re far away from the dusty city
and a feeling, I’m sure, will grow within us that we’ve somehow wandered away into far-off
mountains.”
     “What does one do with a feeling like that?”
     “Feeling like that, we’ll just stand there, silent and motionless for a little while. Then,
suddenly, the roar of a tiger will burst upon us.”
     “Is the tiger trained to roar precisely at that moment?”
     “I guarantee he’ll roar. Even in broad day that fearsome sound can be heard all the way
over at the Science University. So, after dark, in the very dead of night, when not a soul’s about
in the deep-hushed loneliness, when death can be felt in the air and one breathes the reek of
evil mountain spirits. . .”
     “Breathing the reek of evil mountain spirits? Whatever does that mean?”
     “I understand it’s an expression used to signify a condition of extreme terror.”
     “Is it indeed. Not an expression in common use. I don’t believe I’ve ever heard it before.
Anyway, what then?”
     “Then the tiger roars. A savage shattering roar that seems to strip each shaking leaf from
the ancient cedar trees. Really, it’s terrifying.”
     “I can well believe it is.”
     “Well then, how about joining me for such an adventure? I’m sure we’ll enjoy it. An
experience to be treasured. Everyone, sometime, that’s how I see it, really ought to hear a
tiger roar from the depths of night.”
     “Well,” says my master, “I don’t know. . . ” He drops on Coldmoon’s enthusiastic proposal
for an expedition the same wet blanket of indifference with which he has muzzled Yore’s
agonized entreaties.
     Up until this moment that dim nincompoop has been listening, enviously and in silence, to
the talk about the tiger, but as a hypnotist’s key phrase will bring his subject to his senses, my
master’s repetition of his indifference snapped Yore smartly back into remembrance of his own
dilemma. “Revered teacher,” he muttered from his broken trance, “I’m worried sick. What,
what, shall I do?”
     Coldmoon, puzzled, stares at that enormous head. As for me, I feel suddenly moved, for no
particular reason but the feeling, to leave this trio to themselves. Accordingly, I excuse myself
from their company and sidle around to the living room.
     There I find Mrs. Sneaze with the giggles. She has poured tea into a cheap china cup and,
placing that cup on a nasty antimony saucer, says to her niece, “Would you please take this to
our guest?”
     “I’d rather not.”
     “Why not?” The mistress sounds surprised and her giggling stops abruptly.
     “I’d just rather not,” says Yukie. She suddenly adopts a peculiarly supercilious expression
and, firmly seating herself on the matting, bends forward and low to study some rag of a daily
newspaper.
     Mrs. Sneaze immediately resumes negotiations. “What a funny person you are. It’s only Mr.
Coldmoon. There’s no reason to act up.”
     “It’s simply that I really would prefer not to.” The girl’s eyes remain fixed on the newspaper,
but it’s obvious that she’s too het up to be able to read a word of it. What’s more, if anyone
points out that she isn’t reading, there’ll be another flood of maidenly tears.
     “Why are you being so shy?” This time, laughing, Mrs. Sneaze deliberately pushes the cup
and saucer right onto the newspaper as it lies there flat on the floor.
     “What a nasty thing to do!” Yukie tries to yank the paper out from under the tea things,
knocks them flying and the spilled tea shoots all over the paper and the living room matting.
     “There, now!” says the mistress.
     With a cry expressing a curious mixture of anger, shock, and embarrassment, Yukie
scrambles to her feet and runs out into the kitchen. I imagine she’s gone to fetch a mop. I find
this little drama rather amusing.
     Mr. Coldmoon, totally unaware of the female flurry which his visit appears to have stirred up
in the living room, continues, somewhat oddly, his conversation with my master.
     “I notice,” he says, “that you’ve had new paper fixed on that sliding door. Who did it, if I
may ask?”
     “The women. Quite a good job they made of it, don’t you think?”
     “Yes, very professional. You say ‘the women.’ Does that include that college girl who
sometimes comes here visiting?”
     “Yes, she lent a hand. In fact she was boasting that, since she can make such an obviously
splendid job of papering a sliding door, she is also obviously well qualified to get married.”
     “I see,” says Coldmoon still studying the door. “Down the left side, there,” he eventually
continued, “the paper has been fixed on taut and smooth, but along the right-hand edge it
seems to have been inadequately stretched. Hence those wrinkles.”
     “That was where they started the job, before they’d really got the hang of it.”
     “I see. lt’s certainly less well done. The surface forms an exponential curve irrelatable to
any ordinary function.” From the abyss of his scientific training Coldmoon dredges up
monstrosities.
     “I dare say,” says my master, indifferent as ever.
     That dispassionate comment, it would seem, at last brings home to our hooligan scribe the
complete hopelessness of hoping that even the most searing of his supplications could ever
melt my master’s chilly disconcern. Suddenly lowering his huge skull to the matting,Yore in total
silence made his farewell salutation.
     “Ah,” said my master, “you’re leaving?”
     Yore’s crestfallen appearance provided his only answer. We heard him dragging his heavy
cedar clogs even after he’d gone out through the gate.
     A pitiable case. If someone doesn’t come to his rescue, he could well compose one of
those rock-top suicide poems and then fling his stupid body over the lip of Kegon Falls. Come
what may, the root-cause of all this trouble is the flibbertigibbet self-conceit of that insufferable
Miss Goldfield. If Yore does do himself in, it is to be hoped that his ghost will find the time to
scare that girl to death. No man need regret it if a girl like that, even a brace or more of them,
were removed from this already sufficiently troubled world. It seems to me that Coldmoon
would be well advised to marry some more ladylike young person.
     “Was that, then, one of your pupils?”
     “Yes.”
     “What an enormous head. Is he good at his work?”
     “Rather poor for that size of head. But every now and again he asks original questions. The
other day he caught me off balance by asking for a translation of the meaning of Columbus.”
     “Maybe the improbable size of his braincase leads him to pose such an improbable
question. Whatever did you answer?”
     “Oh, something or other off the cuff.”
     “So you actually did translate it. That’s remarkable.”
     “Children lose faith in a language teacher who fails to provide them, on demand, with a
translation of anything they may ask.”
     “You’ve become quite a politician. But to judge by that lad’s look, he must be terribly run
down. He seemed ashamed to be bothering you.”
     “He’s just managed to get himself into something of a mess. Silly young ass!”
     “What’s it all about? The mere sight of him moves one’s sympathy.
     What’s he done?”
     “Rather a stupid thing. He’s sent a love letter to Goldfield’s daughter.”
     “What? That great numbskull? Students nowadays seem to stop at nothing. Quite
astonishing! Really, I am surprised.”
     “I hope this news has not upset you?”
     “Not in the very least. On the contrary, I find it most diverting. I do assure you, it’s quite all
right by me, however, many love letters may come pouring in upon her.”
     “If you feel that self-assured perhaps it doesn’t matter. . .”
     “Of course it doesn’t matter. I really don’t mind at all. But isn’t it rather remarkable that that
great muttonhead should take to writing love letters?”
     “Well, actually, it all started as a kind of joke. Because that girl was so stuck-up and
conceited, my precious trio got together and. . .”
     “You mean that three boys sent one love letter to Miss Goldfield? This business grows
more whacky by the minute. Such a joint letter sounds rather like three people settling down to
share one portion of a Western-style dinner. Don’t you agree?”
     “Well, they did divide the functions up between them. One wrote the letter, another posted
it, and the third loaned his name for its signature. That young blockhead whom you saw just
now, quite the silliest of them all, he’s the one who lent his name. Yet he actually told me that
he’s never even set eyes on the girl. I simply can’t imagine how anyone could do such a
ludicrous thing.”
     “Well, I think it’s spectacular, a wonder of our times, a real masterpiece of the modern
spirit! That that oaf should have it in him to fire off a love letter to some unknown woman. . .
Really, it’s most amusing!”
     “It could lead to some very awkward misunderstandings.”
     “What would it matter if it did? It would be skin off nobody’s nose but the Goldfields’.”
     “But this daughter of theirs is the very girl you may be marrying.”
     “True, but I only may be marrying her. Don’t be so concerned.
     Really, I do not mind in the least about the Goldfields.”
     “You may not mind but. . .”
     “Oh, I’m quite sure the Goldfields wouldn’t mind. Honest!”
     “All right, then, if you say so. Anyway, after the deed was done and the letter delivered,
that boy suddenly began to get qualms of conscience. More precisely, he became scared of
being found out and therefore came sheepishly around here to ask me for advice.”
     “Really? Was that why he looked so very down in the mouth? He must, at heart, be a very
timid boy. You gave him some advice, I suppose?”
     “He’s scared silly of being expelled from school. That’s his chief worry.”
     “Why should he be expelled from school?”
     “Because he has done such a wicked and immoral thing.”
     “You can’t call sending a love letter, even in joke, either wicked or immoral. It’s just not that
important. In fact, I’d expect the Goldfields to take it as an honor and to go around boasting
about it.”
     “Oh, surely not!”
     “Anyway, even if it was wrong to do such a thing, it’s hardly fair to let that poor boy worry
himself sick about it. You could be sending him to his death. Though his head is grotesque, his
features are not evil. He was twitching his nose, you know. Rather sweet, really.”
     “You’re becoming as irresponsible as Waverhouse in the breezy things you say.”
     “Well, that’s no more than the current style. It’s a bit old-fashioned to take things quite as
seriously as you do.”
     “It’s hardly a question of being up-to-date or out-of-fashion. Surely, at any time, anywhere,
only a complete fool could think it funny to send a love letter to an unknown person. It flies in
the face of common sense.”
     “Come now. The vast majority of all jokes depends on the reversal of ordinary common
sense. Ease up on the lad. If only in common charity, do what you can to help him. From what I
saw he was already on his way to Kegon Falls.”
     “Perhaps I should.”
     “Indeed you should. After all, the world is stiff with full-grown men, men with older and
presumably wiser heads, who nevertheless spend all their lives in practical jokes which risk
disaster for their fellow men. Would you punish an idiot schoolboy for signing a love letter when
men whose jokes could wreck the world go totally unpenalized? If you expel him from school,
you can do no less than banish them from civilized society.”
     “Well, perhaps you’re right.”
     “Good. Then that’s settled. Now, how about going out and listening to a tiger?”
     “Ah, the tiger.”
     “Yes. Do come out. As a matter of fact, I’ve got to leave Tokyo in a few days’ time and go
back home to attend to some business. Since it will be quite a while before we’ll be able again
to go out anywhere together, I called today in the express hope we could make some little
expedition this evening.”
     “So you’re going home. And on business?”
     “Yes, something I myself must cope with. Anyway, let’s go out.”
     “All right, I’ll come.”
     “Splendid. Today, dinner’s on me. If, after that, we walk across to the zoo, we should arrive
at exactly the right time.” Coldmoon’s enthusiasm is infectious and, by the time they bustled out
together, my master himself was scarcely less excited.
     Mrs. Sneaze and Yukie, ever, eternally feminine, just went on with their chit-chat and their
sniggering.
                                                IV



    N FRONT OF the alcove,Waverhouse and Singleman sit facing each other with a board for

I   playing go set down between them. “Damned if I’m playing for nothing,” says Waverhouse
    forcefully. “The loser stands a dinner. Right?”
          Singleman tugs at his daft goatee. “In my experience,” he murmurs,
      “to play for gain, for food or filthy lucre, cheapens this noble pastime. It maims the mind to
burden its cells with thoughts of loss or profit.
      Betting’s a scruffy business. I feel, don’t you, that the true value of a game encounter is
only really appreciated in an atmosphere of leisurely calm where, all considerations of success
or failure set aside, one lets things run their own sweet, natural course. Then, and only then,
can the finer points of the game be properly savored by its connoisseurs.”
      “There you go again. Harping away on the same old metaphysical drivel. It’s really quite
impossible to have any sort of sensible game with a man who carries on as if he’d stepped
from the pages of some ancient Chinese tome recording the maunderings of the scholar-
hermits of remote antiquity.”
      “If I harp at all,” says Singleman with quite surprising spirit, “it is, as Yüan Ming so neatly
put it, that I play on a harp that has no strings.”
      “Ah,” says Waverhouse dryly, “like wiring messages on wireless sets, I suppose.”
      “Now then, Waverhouse, you can do better than that. But please don’t try. Let’s get on with
the game.”
      “Will you be black or white?”
      “Suit yourself. Either.”
      “As one might expect of a hermit, you are transcendentally generous.
      If you’ll take white, I’m necessarily black. Right. Let’s get cracking.
      Now then, off you go. Place your first piece anywhere you like.”
      “The rule is that black starts.”
      “Really? Is that so? Very well, being a modest fellow, my opening gambit shall be a black
piece somewhere around here.”
      “You can’t do that.”
      “Why not?”
      “It’s against the rules.”
      “Never mind them. It’s a brand new opening gambit, one I’ve just invented.”
      Since I know so little of the world outside my master’s house, it was only recently that I
first clapped eyes on a go board. It’s a weird contraption, something no sensible cat would ever
think up. It’s a smallish square divided into myriad smaller squares on which the players position
black and white stones in so higgledy-piggledy a human fashion that one’s eyes go askew to
watch them. Thereafter, the devotees of this strange cult work themselves up into a muck-
sweat, excitedly shouting that this or that ridiculous little object is in danger, has escaped, has
been captured, killed, rescued, or whatever. And all this over a bare square foot of board
where the mildest tap with my right, front paw would wreak irreparable havoc. As Singleman
might quote from his compendium of Zen sermons, one gathers grasses and with their thatch
creates a hermitage only to find the same old field when the thatch is blown away.
     You set the pieces out and then you take them off. A silly occupation.
     Why don’t the players keep their hands in the folds of their kimonos and simply stare at an
empty board? In the earlier stages of the game, with only thirty or forty pieces in place, one
could not honestly describe the effect as an eyesore, but as things move to a climax, the
scrimmage of black and white becomes an offense to the civilized mind. The black and white
pieces are so crammed together that they squeak and grate in a jostle of stones. The ones at
the edges seem bound to be pushed clean off the board. No piece can get its neighbors to
make room. None has the right to order those in front to offer gangway to the crush behind.
     All they can do is to crouch down where they are and, without stirring, resign themselves to
their fate. Go is a product of the mind of man and, just as human taste is accurately mirrored in
this ever-more-restrictive game, so one may see in the cramping of the pieces an image of the
human urge to be jammed up tight together. In that ugly crowding one may fairly read man’s
mean antipathy to openness, his deliberate squeezing and diminishment of the very universe,
his passion for territorial limitation within such dwarfish boundaries that he rarely steps beyond
his own immediate shadow. He wallows in the rigors of constriction, in the painful inhibitions of
his choice. He is, in short, a masochist.
     Heaven knows why the flippant minded Waverhouse and his Zen besotted friend have
chosen today for their game, but chosen it they have. They dug the board out from some dusty
cupboard, found the necessary playing stones and eventually settled down to the crass fatuity
of go. As might be expected of them, they began by playing almost skittishly, plonking down
their blacks and whites in a random scatter across the board. But the board has only just so
many squares and it wasn’t long before flippancy and otherworldliness found themselves in
conflict. As the pressure increased, so did the verbal exchanges, spiced, as is their wont, with
scarcely relevant quotations from the minor Chinese classics.
     “Waverhouse, your play is simply awful. Can’t you see it’s crazy to place your piece there?
Take it away and try it somewhere else.”
     “A mere Zen zealot may choose to think it crazy, but I learned that ploy from studying the
practice of the great go master Hon’imbō. You must learn to live with greatness.”
     “But the piece will be slaughtered.”
     “Did not the noble Hankai accept not only death for the sake of his lord but even pork on a
poignard? Consider me no less sporting. Fair enough? Right then, that’s my move.”
     “So that’s your decision. All right. It soothes my troubled brow. As the poet said, ‘A balmy
breeze has blown in from the south and the palace grows a shade more cool.’ Now,” says
Singleman, “if I link my chain of pieces with another piece, just here, lo and behold, I’m safe.”
     “Aha, so you’ve linked them. My, what a clever old thing you are. I never thought you’d see
that one. But there you go, quick as a flash, bang, bang, and you think I’m dead. I’d hoped
you’d be guided by the good old folk song ‘Don’t Bang Bells at the Hachiman Shrine.’ So what
do I do now?” Waverhouse sought to look crafty. “I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’ll put one here. And
what will poor pussy do next?”
     “Poor pussy will next do something both simple and daring, like this.
     Which blocks your line like ‘a sword that points up sharply at the sky.’”
     “Steady on, old man. If you do that, I’ve had it. Hang on a moment, now. Really, that’s not
funny.”
      “I warned yon not to make that move.”
      “I offer my abject apologies. You were quite right, and I’ll take that move back. So, while I
ponder, take your white off, will you?”
      “What! Is this another of your sorry-I-wasn’t-really-ready gambits?”
      “And while you’re at it, you might remove the piece right next to it, too.”
      “You’ve got a damn nerve.”
      “You couldn’t be suggesting that I’m cheating, eh? Oh, come on, Singleman, what’s a stone
or two between friends? Don’t act so stuffy.
      Just be a good chap and take the damn things off. It could hardly matter to a lofty soul like
you, but to me it’s a matter of life and death. Like that moment of supreme crisis in Kabuki
plays when some character comes bounding on stage with shouts of ‘Hang on, hold it.’”
      “I fail to see the similarity.”
      “Never mind what you see or don’t see. Just be a decent fellow and take those pieces off
the board.”
      “This is the sixth time you’ve asked to have your move back.”
      “What a remarkable memory you have. When we play next, I’ll double it up to a good,
round dozen. Anyway, all I’m asking now is that yon should remove a couple of miserable
stones, and I must say you’re being pretty stubborn about it. I would have thought that, with all
your years of contemplating your navel, you’d have learnt by now to show a bit more give.”
      “But if I let you off, that daring risk I took just now will stack the odds against me.”
      “I thought I heard you prating that you pay no heed to such mundane considerations as
winning or losing.”
      “I certainly don’t mind losing, but I don’t want you to win.”
      “Singleman, you dazzle me with the sophistication of your spiritual enlightenment. I
positively gawp at this further manifestation of your gift for cutting through lightning by ‘dashing
your sword at the winds of spring.’”
      “You’ve got that wrong. It should be the other way around —cutting through the spring
winds with a sword flash sharp as lightning.”
      “Indeed, indeed, a laughable mistake. Only I somehow feel my version sounds the better of
the two. I see myself as the last of the great diaskenasts. But let that pass. ‘That passed,’ the
poet said, ‘so may this too.’ Since I see you’ve still got all your wits about you, it looks as
though I’m done for on this part of the board, so I’d best give up the ghost.”
      “We have it from the patriarchs that, sharply different as they are, in ultimate reality there’s
little to differentiate the quick from the dead. I think you’re dead, and you’d be wise to be quick
to accept it.”
      “Amen,” says Waverhouse, slapping down with a savage clack the piece in his hand on a
different part of the board.
      While Waverhouse and Singleman are thus slugging it out in front of the alcove, Coldmoon
and Beauchamp are sitting side-by-side near the entrance to the room. My wretched master
with his yellow face sits with them. Neatly lined up on the matting of the floor, just in front of
Coldmoon and eyeing him fishily, three dried bonitos present an extraordinary spectacle. He’d
brought them around in the breast of his kimono and, though now exposed in all their
nakedness, they still look warm from their walk. Beauchamp and my master were sitting staring
at them with a finely balanced mixture of repulsion and curiosity when Coldmoon finally opened
his mouth. “As a matter of fact, I got back to Tokyo from my visit home about four days ago,
but I’ve been so rushed off my feet with this and that that I couldn’t call around sooner.”
      “There was no need to hurry here,” observes my master with his usual lack of any social
grace.
      “I wouldn’t have hurried, but for my anxiety to give you these fish as quickly as possible.”
      “But, they’re properly dried, aren’t they?”
      “Oh, yes indeed! Dried bonitos are the speciality of my hometown.”
      “A speciality?” says my master. “But I fancy one may find excellent dried bonito right here in
Tokyo.” He lifts the largest fish and, bending slightly, sniffs it.
      “One cannot judge the quality of a dried bonito by smelling it.”
      “Are they special because they’re that much bigger?”
      “Eat one and see.”
      “Certainly I shall eat one. But this one here seems to have an edge chipped off.”
      “That’s precisely why I was in a hurry to get them to you.”
      “I don’t understand.”
      “Well, actually it was slightly gnawed by rats.”
      “But that’s dangerous! Anyone eating that could blacken with the plague.”
      “Not at all, it’s perfectly safe. Such modest gnawings, mere nips and nibbles, never hurt
anyone.”
      “How on earth did the rats get at it?”
      “On board ship.”
      “Ship? What ship? How?”
      “I took passage here from home and, having nothing in which to carry your dried bonitos, I
popped them into my violin’s cloth carrier-bag.
      And it was there, that night, that the damage was done. Frankly, I’d not have cared if the
rats had kept to the fish but unfortunately, perhaps mistaking it for another dried bonito, they
also gnawed away at the frame of my precious instrument.”
      “What idiotic creatures! Perhaps the life at sea blunts their sense of taste. All that salt, you
know: the coarseness of the sea-gone soul.”
      Having delivered himself of these odd remarks, my master sat and stared, fish-eyed and
ictrine, at Coldmoon’s wrinkled gift.
      “It’s in the nature of rats, wherever they may happen to be living, not to discriminate in their
rapacity. Hence, even when I’d gotten the dried fish to my Tokyo lodgings, I worried for their
safety. It kept me awake at night. So in the end I took them into my bed and slept with them.”
      “How revolting. Surely a danger to health?”
      “Yes, I agree. You’d better wash them thoroughly before you eat them.”
      “I doubt if just washing will do.”
      “Perhaps you should soak them in lye and then, for good measure and to restore the color,
polish them up a bit.”
      “Aside from sleeping with ratty fish, did you also take your violin to bed?”
      “The violin’s too bulky to sleep with in one’s arms and. . .”
      At this point the conversation was interrupted from the other side of the room by delighted
shouts from Waverhouse. “Do you mean you’ve been to bed with a violin? How truly romantic! I
recall a little poem from the past:
The spring is passing. Arms can feel
    The weight of the lute
    Becoming real.



    “That, of course, is just an old-fashioned haiku. If he wants to outdo the ancients, the bright
young man of today has no choice but to sleep with a violin in his arms. Beauchamp, lend me
your ears. How about this for a modern variation on the theme?



    Beneath this quilted coverlet,
    Warm to one’s skin,
    Night-long held safe, frets free from fret:
    My treasured violin.



     Of course violins don’t have frets, but what of that? One can’t expect a nitpicking accuracy
of detail in such a splendid example of new-style poetry.”
     Beauchamp, poor fellow, is a literal-minded youth and his serious mold of character cannot
accommodate itself to the verve and shimmers of frivolity. “I’m afraid,” he says, “that, unlike
haiku, new-style poems cannot be constructed off the cuff. They need deep thought, deep
feeling, arduous fabrication. But once they’re properly composed, their exquisite tonation,
working on the inmost soul, can call up spirits from the vasty deep.”
     “Can they really? Well, I never,” says Waverhouse at his falsely ingenuous best. “I’d always
thought that only the smoke of hemp stalks, correctly burnt at the Feast of the Hungry Dead,
could lure souls back to earth. Do you mean to say that new-style poetry is equally
efficacious?”
     Letting his game go hang, he concentrates on teasing Beauchamp.
     “You’ll get trounced again if you keep on babbling rubbish,” my master warns him.
     But Waverhouse takes no notice. “I myself am quite indifferent to winning or losing, but it
just so happens that my opponent is now immobilized, squashed up tight like an octopus in a
saucepan. And it’s only to while away the tedium of waiting for him to decide upon his next wee
wriggle of a move that I am forced to join you in your concourse of violins.”
     Singleman snorts in his exasperation. “For goodness sake,Waverhouse, it’s your move now.
I’m the one who’s being kept waiting.”



    “Ah? So you’ve made a move?”
    “Of course I have—ages ago.”
    “Where?”
    “I’ve extended this diagonal of whites.”
    “So you have. . .
Diagonal and white
    His hand extends
    The line that in disaster ends.



    “Well, in that case my response shall be. . . shall be. . . I know not what, but it shall be the
terror of this earth.



    As I was saying, ‘I plan, I plan,’
    Daylight darkened
    And the night began.



     “I tell you what. Out of the extreme kindness of my heart I shall grant you an extra move.
Place a stone anywhere you like.”
     “You can’t play go like that.”
     “You refuse my generosity? Then you leave me no choice but to. . . what? Suppose I set a
piece down here, over in this relatively unsettled territory, right in the corner. Incidentally,
Coldmoon, your fiddle can’t be up to much if even the rats don’t like it. Why don’t you splash out
on a better one? Shall I get one of those antique models, at least three hundred years old, from
Italy?”
     “I could never thank you enough—especially if you were also so kind as to foot the bill.”
     “How could anything as old as that be any use whatever?” His ignorance does not stop my
master from speaking his mind.
     “I think, Sneaze, you’re comparing antique fiddles with antiquated men. They’re not the
same, you know. Yet even among men, some of the older models—Goldfield for example—
become more valuable with age. And when it comes to violins it’s invariably a case of the older
the better. . . Now, Singleman, will you please get a move on. Being myself no windbag, indeed
a man succinct if not actually terse in speech, I will not waste time on a full quotation from the
relevant Kabuki play, but have we not been warned by Keimasa that autumn days draw swiftly
to their close?”
     “It’s pure agony playing go with a feckless galloper like you. There’s never time to think.
Well, if you insist on headlong play, that’s the way of it. I shall place one here.”
     “What a pity! You’ve escaped my clutches after all. I had so hoped you wouldn’t make that
move, and I’ve been racking my brains to think up enough rubbish to distract you. All, I fear, in
vain.”
     “Naturally. Some of us concentrate on the game, not on trying to cheat.”
     “Sir, I never cheat. I may pay less regard to the game than to games-manship, but that is
precisely the teaching of the school of Hon’imbō, of the Goldfield School, and of the School of
Modern Gentlemen. I say, Sneaze, you remember those sharpish pickles that Singleman
gobbled down at Kamakura? They seem, after all, to have done him good. He’s not much use
at go, but nothing now seems able to perturb him. I take my hat off to his pickled nerves.
They’re steady as steel.”
     “Then why,” says my master with his back still turned toward Waverhouse, “doesn’t an
inconsequential fidget like yourself make the effort to imitate his steadiness and sense?”
     Waverhouse, unusually, said nothing but just stuck out a large, red tongue.
     Singleman, seemingly unconcerned by these exchanges, tries once again to interest
Waverhouse in their game. “It’s you to go,” he says.
     As Waverhouse takes back his tongue and looks down at the board, Beauchamp turns to
Coldmoon. “Tell me, when did you start playing the violin? I’d very much like to learn, but they
say it’s terribly difficult.”
     “Anyone can learn to play a little.”
     “It’s always been my sneaking hope that, given the similar nature of all arts, persons with
an aptitude for poetry ought to be quick at mastering music. Do you think there’s anything in it?”
     “Perhaps. I’m sure you’d do all right: indeed, very well.”
     “When did you start your own study of the art?”
     “In high school. Have I ever told you,” said Coldmoon turning to my master, “how I first
came to learn the violin?”
     “No, not yet.”
     “Was it perhaps,” asks Beauchamp, “that you had some high school music teacher who
encouraged you to learn?”
     “No, no teacher; in fact no human encouragement at all. I simply taught myself.”
     “Quite a genius.”
     “Being self-taught doesn’t necessarily mean that one’s a genius,” says Coldmoon looking
sour. He is, I think, the only being who’d resent being called a genius.
     “The point’s irrelevant. Just tell us how you taught yourself. It would he useful to know.”
     “And I’d be happy to tell you. Sir,” he addresses my master, “have I your permission to do
so?”
     “Of course. Please carry on.”
     “The streets these days are chock-a-block with bright, young men walking along with violin
cases in their hands. But when I was a high school lad, very few of us could play any Western
instrument whatsoever. My own particular school was way out in the sticks where, since life
was lived in accordance with a strong tradition of extreme simplicity, nary a student played the
violin.”
     “An interesting story seems to have started over there, Singleman, so let’s pack up this
game right now.”
     “There are still a few points left undecided.”
     “Forget them all. I’m only too happy to make you a present of the lot.”
     “But I can’t accept that.”
     “What a meticulous man you are, totally insensitive to that broad approach one expects
from a scholar of Zen. All right then, we’ll finish it off in double quick time. Coldmoon, my dear
fellow, I’m fascinated by your account of that high school. Am I right in thinking yours must be
that one where all the students went barefoot?”
     “It’s true, I attended the school about which so many such lying yarns have been told.”
     “But I’ve heard you drilled without shoes and that, from a thousand about-turns, the soles of
your feet grew inches thick.”
     “Absolute nonsense! Whoever stuffed you up with such a ludicrous canard?”
     “Never mind who. But they also said that every student brings in for his lunch an enormous
rice-ball, as big as a summer orange, hanging from his hip on a string. Is that a canard too? It’s
further said that the students gobble the rice like mad, unsalted though it is, in order to get at
the pickled plum allegedly buried inside. They certainly sound an extremely vigorous and hardy
group of youngsters. Are you listening, Singleman? This is exactly the sort of story that appeals
to you.”
     “I’m not at all sure that I get the story’s point, but I do indeed approve of simplicity and
sturdiness.”
     “As to simplicity, there’s yet another characteristic of that area which should earn your
praise. It is, in fact, so simple that they’ve not yet heard of making ashtrays by sectioning
bamboo. A friend of mine who was once on the staff of Coldmoon’s school tried to buy such an
ashtray, even one of the roughest hew, and the shopkeeper simply told him that, since anyone
could go and cut himself an ashtray in the forest, there was no point in trying to make them as
objects for sale. Now that’s what I call true simplicity. True sturdiness as well. Singleman, you
agree?”
     “Yes, yes, of course I do. But if you’re going to secure your position, Waverhouse, you
must immediately put down a reinforcing piece.”
     “Right. I’ll make assurance doubly, doubly sure. A stone placed there should finish the
game. You know, Coldmoon, when I heard your account of your early struggles I was frankly
amazed. It’s quite astonishing that in such a backward place you should, unaided, have taught
yourself to play the violin. More than two thousand years ago, in the high days of the Han, that
marvelous man Ch’ü Yüan was writing poems, still unmatched, about the wonders of a life
withdrawn from the madding crowd. It could be, Coldmoon, you were born to be our new Ch’ü
Yüan.”
     “That I should very much dislike.”
     “Well than, how about being the Werther of our times? What’s that, Singleman? You want
me to pick up my stones and count them? What a pernickety bore you are! There’s no need for
counting. It’s perfectly obvious that I’ve lost.”
     “But one cannot leave things hanging in the air. One wants to know the score.”
     “All right, then. Be so good as to do my counting for me. I really can’t be bothered with
such a dull accountant’s chore when it is my solemn aesthetic duty to learn how the most gifted
Werther of our day started learning to play the violin. Would you have me shunned by my
ancestors? Therefore,” says Waverhouse, “you must excuse me.” Sliding his cushion away
from the gameboard, Waverhouse moved to sit near Coldmoon. Singleman stayed where he
was, methodically gathering stones and marshaling them in little armies to be counted.
Coldmoon resumes the telling of his story.
     “It was not only that the land was rugged, its inhabitants were philistine and coarse. They
considered that any student with even the mildest interest in the arts would get them all laughed
at for effeminacy by the students of other prefectures, so their persecution of anyone guilty of
refinement was unremittingly merciless.”
     “It’s a sad fact,” says Waverhouse, “but the students in Coldmoon’s part of the country
really are uncouth. Why, for instance, are they always dressed in those dark blue, skirted
trousers? The color itself is odd enough, but it looks unpleasantly worse against their near-
black skin which is, presumably, occasioned by the high degree of sea salt in the local air. Of
course, it doesn’t greatly matter how dark the men become, but, if their women-folk are
similarly blighted, it must affect their marriage prospects.” As usual, when Waverhouse joins in
a conversation, its original drift is soon diverted into new and unlikely channels.
     “The women there are no less black than the men.”
     “Do the men show any wish to marry them?”
     “Since they’re all as black as each other, no one seems to notice.”
     “What a ghastly state of affairs. One’s heart bleeds, doesn’t it, Sneaze, for all those muddy
women.”
     “Well, if you’re asking me, my opinion of women is that the blacker they are the better. A
light skinned female tends to grow more and more conceited every time she sees herself in a
mirror. And all women, all the time, are incorrigible, so anything,” says my master with a heavy
sigh,
     “that makes them less delighted with themselves is very much to be wished for.”
     “But if the entire population is dark skinned, won’t black become beautiful and the blackest
most fair?” Beauchamp puts his Finger on a tricky point.
     “The world would be a better place if we were only rid of them all.”
     My master puts his view in a nutshell.
     “If you go around saying things like that,” laughs Waverhouse, “your wife will give you what-
for later on.”
     “No danger of that.”
     “She’s out?”
     “Yes, she went out quite some while ago with the children.”
     “No wonder it’s been quiet. Where’s she gone?”
     “I haven’t the faintest idea. She goes out where and when she likes.”
     “And she comes home as she likes?”
     “More or less. You two don’t know how lucky you are to be single. I envy you both from the
bottom of my heart.”
     Beauchamp looks slightly uncomfortable, but Coldmoon keeps on grinning.
     “All married men grow to feel like that,” says Waverhouse. “What about you, Singleman?
Does your wife drive you crazy?”
     “Eh? Hang on a tick. Six fours are twenty-four, plus one and one and one makes twenty-
seven. Waverhouse, you managed to do better than it looked from the layout on the board. The
margin in my favor is no more than a measly eighteen stones. Now then, what was that you
asked?”
     “I asked if you, too, were driven crazy by a troublesome wife.”
     “You must be joking again. But, to answer your question, I’m not particularly troubled by my
wife, perhaps because she loves me.”
     “Oh, I do beg your pardon. How typical of Singleman to have a loving wife.”
     “Singleman’s no singleton. The world is full of loving wives.”
     Coldmoon, a somewhat unlikely champion of the ladies, pipes up sturdily in their defense.
     “Coldmoon’s right,” says Beauchamp. “As I see it, there are only two roads by which a man
may come to perfect bliss: by the road of love, and by the road of art. Of all the forms of love,
married love is perhaps the noblest. It therefore seems to me that to remain unmarried is to
flout the will of Heaven. And what,” asks Beauchamp, bending upon Waverhouse his sad and
serious gaze, “do you, sir, think of that?”
     “I think you have stated an unanswerable case. I fear that this old bachelor will never enter
the sphere of perfect bliss.”
     “If you get yourself a wife, you’ll have made it doubly sure that bliss will not be yours.” My
master croaks from the bottom of the grim well of experience.
     “Be that as it may,” says Beauchamp, “we young bachelors will never grasp the meaning of
life unless we open our hearts and minds to the elevating spirituality of the arts. That is why, in
the hope that I might learn to improve myself by playing the violin, I am so particularly
interested to hear more of Coldmoon’s interrupted account of his actual experience.”
     “Ah, yes,” says Waverhouse, “we were going to hear the tale of our own young Werther’s
fiddling. Please tell us now. I promise, no more interruptions.” With this belated
acknowledgement of his habitual failing,Waverhouse at last shut up.
     But the spirit of Waverhouse, like the monstrous Hydra itself, is not easily suppressed. Cut
off one head, and in its place grow two. Silence Waverhouse, and Singleman gives tongue. “No
man ever,” he waffled,
     “became a better man by virtue of a violin. It would be intolerable if universal truth were
accessible through self-abandonment to mere fun.
     Truly to lose the self and thus to achieve the ultimate reality of the identity of self and non-
self, a man must be willing to hang by his nails from a cliff, to let go, and to fall to that death in
which his spirit may be reborn.” With these pomposities Singleman sought to reprove
Beauchamp’s frivolous materialism; however, he might as well have saved his breath, for
Beauchamp knows nothing of Zen and, as his next dry words revealed, has no desire to do so.
     “Really?” he comments. “You may be right, but I remain convinced that art is the clearest
expression of the highest human aspirations, and I am not to be shaken in that conviction.”
     “Good for you,” says Coldmoon. “I shall be glad to speak of my artistic experience to so
congenial a soul. Well, as I was saying, I had great difficulties to contend with before I could
even start learning the violin. Can you imagine, Mr. Sneaze, the agonies I suffered merely to
buy a violin?”
     “Well, I assume that in a place so generally God forsaken as not to have even hemp soled
sandals for sale, it can’t have been easy to find a shop that offered violins.”
     “Oh, there was shop, alright. And I’d saved up cash enough for a purchase. But it wasn’t as
simple as that.”
     “Why not?”
     “Because if I bought a fiddle in a dorp that small, everyone would know, and its brute
inhabitants would immediately have made my life unbearable. Believe you me, anyone out there
who was thought to be the least bit arty had a very thin time.”
     “Genius is always persecuted,” sighed Beauchamp with deep sympathy.
     “There you go again. I do wish you’d stop calling me a genius. It’s an embarrassment.
Anyway, every day as I passed that shop where the fiddles were displayed, I’d say to myself,
‘Ah, how wonderful it would be just to hold one in my arms, to be the owner of a fiddle. Oh,
how I wish and wish that one of them were mine.’”
     “Quite understandable,” commented Waverhouse.
     “But it’s distinctly odd,” my master mused in a voice where his usual bilious perversity was
overlaid with genuine wonder, “that some otherwise sensible lad should wander about a
backwoods hamlet drooling over a violin.”
     “It simply proves what I’ve just been saying. Drooling’s a sign of genius.”
     Only Singleman held aloof, vouchsafing nothing and twisting his foolish beard.
     “Perhaps you’re wondering how there came to be violins available in such a graceless
place, but the explanation’s quite simple. There was, you see, a ladies academy in the
neighborhood, and, since the curriculum included daily violin-practice, the local shopkeepers
were quick to exploit such a captive market. Of course, the violins were of poor quality; more
rustic gues than genuine violins. And the shop-folk treated them very roughly, hanging them up
at the shop entrance in bunches of two or three, like so many vegetables. Yet, as one passed
the shop, one could hear them humming in the wind or, in response to some shopboy’s casual
finger, quivering into sound. Their singular timbre, every time I heard it, thrilled my heart to such
a pitch of excitement that I felt it could but burst.”
     “That sounds dangerous. There are, of course, many varieties of epilepsy, such as that
brought on by the sight of water and that provoked by the presence of crowds. But our young
Werther,” says Waverhouse—never one to miss an opportunity to wallow in the absurd—seems
unique in suffering seizures at the thrumming of fiddle strings.”
     But the plodding Beauchamp, prosaic even in his passion for the poetic, wouldn’t recognize
a flight of fancy if it landed on his nose. “It’s not a matter for mockery,” he snaps. “No man can
truly be an artist unless he has sensitivities as keen as Coldmoon’s. I say again, Coldmoon is a
genius.”
     Coldmoon still looks restless to have such greatness thrust upon him.
     “No, no,” he says, “maybe it really is some epileptic variant; but the fact remains that the
timbre of those sounds moved me to the core. I’ve played and heard the violin time and again
since then, but nothing ever has matched the beauty of that random music. There are no words
to convey the faintest echo of its magic. . .”
     Nobody paid the slightest attention to Singleman when, rather aptly as it seemed to me, he
quoted from an obscure Taoist text: “Only from gems, the jewels in its hilt, could such sweet
sounds have issued from the sword.” I felt sorry, not only for Singleman but for Chuang-tzu,
too, that the words were left to die.
     “Day after day for many months, I walked past that shop, but I heard that marvelous music
only thrice. On the third occasion I decided that, come what might, I would have to buy a violin.
Reproof from the people of my own district, sneers from the slobs in neighboring prefectures,
thumpings organized by my fellow students, fist-lynchers to a man, not even formal expulsion
from the school could budge me from my resolution. I had no choice but to satisfy my all-
consuming need. I would buy a violin.”
     “How characteristic of genius. That drive, that total concentration upon fulfillment of an inner
need. Ah, Coldmoon, how I envy you! How I have longed, lifelong and always in vain, to
experience feelings of such vehemence. I go to concerts and I strain my ears until they ache in
an effort to be carried away, but for all my full-hearted striving, nothing seems to happen. How
you must pity,” said Beauchamp in tones that mixed black sadness and green envy, “us
earthbound clods.”
     “Count yourself lucky,” Coldmoon answers. “I can speak of my enthrallment now with
relative calm. But then it was pure agony.
     Excruciating agony. Anyway, my masters, in the end I took the plunge and bought a violin.”
     “Say on.”
     “It was the eve of the Emperor’s birthday, in November. Everyone in my lodgings had gone
off to some hot spring for the night, and the place was empty. I’d reported sick that day and,
absenting myself from school, had stayed in bed, where, all day long, I nursed the single
thought: this evening I’ll go out and get that violin.”
     “You mean you played truant by shamming illness?”
     “That’s right.”
     “Talent indeed,” says Waverhouse lost in wonder. “Perhaps he really is a genius.”
     “As I lay with my head sticking out of the bedclothes, I grew impatient for the nightfall. To
break the tension, I ducked beneath the covers and, with my eyes closed tight, entreated
sleep; which did not come. So I pulled my head back out, only to find the fierce autumn sun still
fully ablaze on the paper-window six feet long. Which niggled me. I then noticed, high up on the
paper-window, a long stringy shadow which, every so often, wavered in the autumn wind.”
     “What was that long, stringy shadow?”
     “Peeled, astringent persimmons strung like beads on raffia cords suspended from the
eaves.”
      “Hmm. What happened next?”
      “Next, having nothing else to do, I got up from bed, opened the paper-window and went out
onto the veranda. There I detached one of the persimmons that had dried to sweetness, and
ate it.”
      “Did it taste good?” My master can be trusted, whatever the subject, to find some childish
question to be asked.
      “Excellent. Persimmons down there really are superb. You will not taste their like anywhere
in Tokyo.”
      “Never mind the persimmons. What did you do next?” This time it was Beauchamp who
was pressing for clarification.
      “Next, I ducked back into bed again, closed my eyes and breathed a silent prayer to all the
gods and Buddhas for nightfall to come soon. It then seemed that three, perhaps four, long
hours had passed; so thinking the evening must have come, I brought my head out from under
the bed clothes. To my surprise, the fierce autumn sun was still fully ablaze on the six-foot
paper-window, and, on its upper part, those long and stringy shadows were still swaying.”
      “We’ve heard all that.”
      “The same sequence happened again and again. In any event, I got up from bed, opened
the paper-window, ate one persimmon that had dried to sweetness, went back to bed, and
breathed a silent prayer to all the gods and Buddhas for nightfall to come soon.”
      “We don’t seem to be making much progress with that promised story about learning to
play the violin.”
      “Don’t rush me. Just listen, please. Well, having endured the next three, or perhaps four,
hours in my bed until, I thought, surely it must now be evening, I popped my head up out of the
covers only to find the fierce, autumn sun still fully ablaze on the paper window while, on its
upper part, the long stringy shadows were asway.”
      “You’re getting us nowhere.’
      “Then, I got up from bed, opened the paper-window, went out onto the veranda, ate one
persimmon dried to sweetness and. . .”
      “So you ate another one? Is there no end to your dreary guzzle of persimmons dried to
sweetness?”
      “Well, my impatience grew worse.”
      “Your impatience! What about ours?”
      “You want everything so rushed along that I find it hard to continue my story.”
      If Coldmoon finds it hard, so does his audience; even the devoted Beauchamp makes little
whimpers of complaint.
      “If you all find listening too hard, I have no choice but to bring my story abruptly to its end.
In short, I repeated this oscillation between eating persimmons and ducking into bed until all the
fruit were gone.”
      “By the time you’d guzzled that lot the sun must surely have gone down.”
      “As a matter of fact, it hadn’t. After I’d eaten the last persimmon I ducked back into bed,
and in due course popped my head out yet again, only to find the fierce autumn sun still fully
ablaze upon that six-foot paper-window. . .”
      “I’ve had enough of this. It just goes on and on.”
      “Me too. I’m bored stiff with the way you tell your tiresome story.”
     “But it isn’t easy on me, you know.”
     “With the degree of perseverance you have already proven you possess, no enterprise
whatsoever could be too difficult. If we had sat here uncomplaining, your autumn sun would
have gone on blazing until tomorrow morning. Tell me this: do you, and if so when, intend to buy
that violin?” Even the indefatiguable Waverhouse is showing signs of wear. Singleman alone
seems unaffected by the slow unrolling (or rather the slow unrolling and rerolling) of Coldmoon’s
quaint account. For all he cared, Coldmoon’s autumn sun could go on blazing all through the
night; even, perhaps, until the day, or days, beyond tomorrow.
     Coldmoon, too, shows no sign of strain. Calm and composed, he drones on with his story.
“Someone has asked me when I intend to buy my violin. The answer is that I intend to go out
and buy it just as soon as the sun has set. It is hardly my fault that, whenever I peer out from
the bedclothes, the autumn sun is still so brilliantly ablaze. Oh, how I suffered! It was far, far
worse, that deep impatience in my soul, than this superficial irritation which seems, so pettily, to
irk you all. After I’d eaten the last of the hanging persimmons and saw the day still bright, I
could not help but perish into tears. Beauchamp, my dear fellow, I felt so reft of hope that I
wept, I wept.”
     “I’m not at all surprised. Your weeping does you credit. All artists are essentially emotional
and their tears are distillations of the truth of things. Nevertheless, one does rather wish that
you could speed things up a bit.” Beauchamp’s a decent-hearted creature and, even when he’s
knee deep in absurdities, maintains his earnest manner.
     “Much as I’d like to speed it up, that laggard sun won’t set. Its hang-up is most hard to
bear.”
     “Your endlessly unsetting sun is no less hard on us, your tanned and sweating audience.
So, let’s forget the whole interminable tale before its lentor kills us. Scrub it, Coldmoon,” says
my master who is now quite clearly nearing the end of his tether.
     “You’d find it harder still if we stopped at this point. For we are now coming to the really
interesting part of the story.”
     “All right then. We’re prepared to listen, but only on condition that the sun goes down.”
     “That’s a pretty tall order, but all things yield to my revered teacher, and lo the sun has set.”
     “How extraordinarily convenient.” Singleman uttered his toneless comment with so much
nonchalance that everyone broke into laughter.
     “So night, at last, had fallen. You can perhaps imagine my relief. With great stealth I slipped
out of my lodgings into the quietness of Saddletree, for so that huddle of poor dwellings had
been named. My nature shrinks from noisy places so that, despite the obvious conveniences of
a city life, I had at that time chosen to withdraw from the whirl of the world and to live secluded
in a snail shell of a dwelling, a farmhouse miles from anywhere in a corner of the countryside
scarce trodden by the foot of man.”
     “That ‘scarce trodden by the foot of man’ seems to be piling it on a bit,” objects my master.
     “And that touch about the ‘snail shell dwelling,’” adds Waverhouse, “is insufferably
bombastic. Why don’t you say, ‘in a tiny room, too small even to have an alcove?’That would
sound much better, if only because a great deal less affected.”
     But Beauchamp, as he immediately makes clear, finds the description praiseworthy.
“Whatever the facts of the room’s dimensions, Coldmoon’s phrasing is poetic. I find it very
pleasing.”
     The meticulous Singleman chips in with a serious enquiry. “It must have been an exhausting
business trudging there and back to school from such a remote shack. How many miles,
roughly, would you say?”
      “Perhaps five hundred yards. You see, the school itself was in the remote village. . .”
      “In that case, many of its students would have been boarded in nearby lodgings. Is that
correct?” asks Singleman in relentless tones which suggest the far-off baying of bloodhounds.
      “Yes. Most of the farm dwellings had one or two student lodgers.”
      “Yet, did you not describe the place as scarcely trodden by the foot of man?” Singleman
moves in for the kill.
      “I did indeed. But for the school the place would have been virtually uninhabited. Now, let
me tell you how I was dressed as I slipped out into lonely Saddletree in that deepening dusk.
Over a padded handwoven cotton kimono, I wore the brass-buttoned overcoat of my school
uniform. With the overcoat’s hood pulled well down over my head to make sure I’d not be
recognized, I drifted along the road in such a way as not to attract attention. Being November,
the road from my lodgings to the Southern Highway was thick with fallen persimmon leaves.
Every step I took set the dead leaves scurrying, and their rustle behind me seemed proof that I
was being followed. When I turned and looked back, the dense mass of the Tōrei Temple,
blacker even than its surrounding forest, loomed up black above me. As you may know, that
temple is the family shrine of the Matsudaira Clan. An extremely quiet and little-visited building,
it lies at the foot of Mount Kōshin not more than a hundred yards from where I was then living.
Above the forest trees the sky’s vast hollow glittered with moonlit stars, while the Milky Way,
slicing across the River of Long Rapids, stretched east and ever east toward. . . now let me
see, toward. . . well yes, Hawaii.”
      “Hawaii? That’s quite startling,” said a startled Waverhouse.
      “I walked some two hundred yards along the Southern Highway, entered the township from
Eagle Lane, turned into Old Castle Street, up Great Bushel Road and so past First Street,
Second Street, and Third Street, all running off Main Street which itself runs parallel to the
Road of the Cost of Food. From there I took Owari Street, Nagoya Street, and the Street of
the Magic Dolphin into Fishball Lane and thence. . .”
      “You can spare us the topography. What we want to know,” my master rudely interrupts, “is
whether or not you bought a violin.”
      “The man who sells musical instruments is Kaneko Zenbei so, using parts of his own name,
he calls his shop Kane-zen. But to reach the shop, sir, we’ve still some way to go.”
      “Forget the distance. Just go and buy a violin. And do it quickly.”
      “Your wish, sir, is, as always, my command. Well, when I got to Kane-zen, the shop was
ablaze with lantern light and. . .”
      “Ablaze? Oh no. Not that again. How often this time are you going to scorch us with the
blazing repetition?” On this occasion it was Waverhouse who raised the fire alarm.
      “Friends, have no fear. It’s only a passing kind of blaze that lights your immediate horizon. It
will, I do assure you, flicker and die down. Well, as I peer through the light blaze from the shop,
I can see a faint reflection of that glare shining from the polished body of a violin while the
roundness of its pinched-in waist gleams almost coldly. So falls the lantern’s light across its
tightly drawn strings that only a section of the fiddle’s stringing flings out at me its glistening
darts of silver.”
      “Now that,” says Beauchamp almost moaning in his pleasure at the words, “is a truly
masterly piece of description.”
     “That’s the one, I thought, that’s the one for me. The blood began pounding in my head and
my legs so weakened they could barely hold me up.”
     Behind a scornful smile, Singleman grunted.
     “Instinctively, and with no further thought, I rushed into the shop, yanked out my purse,
pulled from it a couple of five-yen notes and. . .”
     “So in the end you bought it?” asked my master.
     “I was certainly going to do so, but then I thought to myself,‘Wait. This is the moment of
crisis. If I act rashly I may bungle things. Should I not pause for deeper reflection?’ So, at the
eleventh hour, I reined myself in.”
     “Sweet heaven,” groaned my master, “d’you mean to say that even now, after we’ve
slogged along behind you across such veritable Australias of balderdash, you’ve still not bought
your fiddle. You really do drag things out. And all for some piddling contraption of cheap wood
and catgut.”
     “It is not, sir, my intention to drag things out. I can’t help being unable to buy it.”
     “Why can’t you?”
     “Why can’t I? Because it’s still too early in the evening. There were still too many people
passing by.”
     “What does it matter if there are two or even three hundred people in the streets?
Coldmoon, you really are an extraordinary man,” my master shouted in his anger and
frustration.
     “If they were just people,” says Coldmoon, “even a thousand, even two thousand of them,
of course it wouldn’t matter. But many of them were in fact my fellow students; prowling about
with their sleeves rolled up and with bludgeons in their hands. There’s a particular group, the
Dregs, who pride themselves on being permanently at the bottom of the class. I had to be
careful because louts of that kind are invariably good at judo, and I dared not take the risk of
any kind of tangle with them. For who knows where even the most trivial brush with violence
may end?
     Of course, I yearned to have that violin, but I was also fairly anxious to remain alive. I
preferred to go on breathing without playing a violin to lying dead for having played it.”
     “Then am I right in thinking that you didn’t buy a fiddle?” My master struggles on in search
of certainties.
     “Oh, but I did make a purchase.”
     “Coldmoon, you’re driving me mad. If you’re going to buy a fiddle, buy it; if you don’t want
to buy one, don’t. But for the sake of my sanity, please settle the matter one way or the other.”
     Coldmoon grinned. “Things settle themselves,” he said, “and all too rarely in the way one
had most hoped.” With careless care he lit a cigarette and blew out smoke at the ceiling.
     I think it was the smoke which finally snapped my master’s patience.
     In any event, it was at this point that he abruptly rose to his feet, went off into his study
and, returning with a musty-looking, foreign book, lay down flat on his stomach and began to
read. Singleman had earlier slipped away unremarked, and is now sitting in front of the alcove
playing go by himself. The plain fact is that Coldmoon’s story has proved so boringly long that,
one by one, his listeners have abandoned him. Only two of them are still sticking it out:
Beauchamp with his unquenchable faith in art and Waverhouse to whom longeur is second
nature.
     Coldmoon somewhat crudely blew out a last long stream of smoke and resumed telling his
story at the same leisurely pace.
      “Having decided that an immediate purchase of that violin would be ill timed, I now had to
decide upon a suitable timing. The early part of the evening had already been found too
dangerous and the shop would of course be closed if I came too late. Clearly the ideal time
would be somewhere before closing time but after the prowling students had all retired to their
lairs. Yet to identify the precise best moment of purchase was not, as I’m sure you,
Beauchamp, will appreciate, at all easy.”
      “I can see it would be difficult.”
      “Eventually, I fixed upon ten o’clock as the best time for action. But what should I do until
then? I didn’t much like the idea of going back to my lodgings only to sneak out again; while
visiting some friend for a time-wasting chat struck me as too selfish. I accordingly decided to
pass the waiting period in a simple stroll around town: two or three hours, I thought, could
always be quickly and congenially consumed in such a leisured ramble. But on this particular
evening so leadenly the time dragged by that I understood as deeply in my heart as if I myself
had coined that ancient line which says, ‘A single day seems long as a thousand autumns.’”
Coldmoon twisted his features into a pattern which he presumably considered expressive of the
agonies of waiting and, confident of some suitable reaction from Waverhouse, turned the full
glare of his faked distress upon that subtle aesthete.
      Nor was he disappointed. Waverhouse would interrupt the announcement of his own death
sentence for the sake of hearing himself babble, and Coldmoon’s look of open invitation was
utterly irresistible.
      “As I recall,” he immediately responded, “the old song tells us not only that it is painful to be
kept waiting by the beloved but also, as one might of course expect, that the waiter feels more
pain than the awaited. So perhaps that eaves-strung violin actually experienced more bitter
pains of waiting than did you on your aimless and dispirited wandering around town like some
clueless detective. ‘Dispirited’ is a splendid word. Isn’t it the Chinese who say, ‘dispirited as an
unfed dog in a house of mourning?’ Indeed, there’s nothing more dismal than the whining of a
homeless dog.”
      “A dog? That’s cruel. I’ve never before been likened to a dog.”
      “As I listen to your story I feel as though I were reading the biography of some ancient,
master artist, and my heart brims with sympathy for your sufferings. Our tame comedian
Waverhouse was only trying to be funny when he compared you with a dog. Take no notice of
his nonsense but pray continue with your story.” Beauchamp pours oil on potentially troubled
waters, but Coldmoon in truth needs neither encouragement nor consolation. Come what may,
he’s going to tell his story “Well,” he continues, “I wandered up Infantry Road and, along the
Street of a Hundred Houses and thence, through Money-changers’
      Alley, into the Street of the Falconers. There I counted first the withered willows in front of
the prefectural office, and then the lighted windows in the side-wall of the hospital. I smoked
two cigarettes on Dyer’s Bridge and then I looked at my watch. . .”
      “Was it yet ten o’clock?”
      “Not yet, I’m sorry to say. I drifted across Dyer’s Bridge and as I walked eastward along
the river path I passed a home bound group of three masseurs. Somewhere in the distance
dogs were howling at the moon.”
      “To hear, on an autumn night by the riverside, the distant barking of dogs. . . That sounds
like some scene-setting speech from a Kabuki play.
      You, Coldmoon, are cast as the fugitive hero.”
      “Have I done anything wrong?”
      “You are about to do something frightful.”
      “That’s a bit much. All I’m going to do is to buy a violin. If that’s to be considered criminal,
every student at every school of music must be guilty of crime.”
      “Criminality is not determined by any absolute standard of good or evil. The acts of a
criminal may actually be good in absolute terms but, since they have not been recognized as
good by the consensus of public opinion enshrined in the law, they will be treated, and
punished, as crimes. It is extremely difficult to establish what, in truth, is a crime.
      For what is truth? Christ himself in the context of his society was a criminal and was
punished as a criminal. Of the bloodline from King David, he was accused by his fellow Jews of
wishing to be a king. He did not deny the charge, which naturally was very serious to the
Roman governor of that conquered province, and the plaque on his crucifix, ‘The King of the
Jews,’ identified his crime. Now, does our handsome Coldmoon deny being an artist in a society
where artists are regarded as offensive? Of lusting after a violin in a community where such a
filthy emotion is virtually criminal?”
      “All right,” says Coldmoon. “I acknowledge my guilt. But what worries me is how to pass
the time until ten o’clock finally deigns to arrive.”
      “Nonsense,” replies Waverhouse. “You can run through, yet again, that time consuming
naming of the names of streets. If that doesn’t work, you can haul up your dear, old autumn sun
for a few more bouts of blazing. And what about those persimmons, sun-dried, of course, to
sweetness? I’m sure you could eat at least another three dozen. That sort of stuff will keep you
going until ten, and I’m prepared to listen for as long as you like.”
      Coldmoon had the grace to break into a broad grin. “Since you’ve taken the very words
from my mouth, I won’t insist on using them myself. So, by an artistic distortion of the truth, all
of a sudden it’s ten o’clock. Right on that appointed hour I returned to Kane-zen. The streets
were deserted, and the sound of my wooden clogs was desperately lonely. The big outer
shutters had already been hoisted into place across the front of the shop and only the paper
sliding door of its small side entrance was still available for use. As I slid that light door open, I
was again assailed by a vaguely uneasy feeling that some sneaky dog was still slinking along
behind me.”
      At this point, my master glanced up from his grubby-looking book and asked, “Have you
bought that violin yet?”
      “He’s just going to buy it now,” said Beauchamp.
      “What! He still hasn’t bought it after all this time? Buying fiddles must be an arduous
business,” my master mutters to himself and turns back to his reading. Singleman, who has by
now practically covered the whole board with black and white pieces, maintains his
disinterested silence.
      “Summoning up my courage, I dived into the shop and, with my head buried in my hood,
said that I wanted a violin. Several shop boys and young assistants who were sitting chattering
around a brazier looked up in surprise and stared at my half hidden face. Automatically, with my
right hand, I tugged the hood still lower. When I had asked for a second time to be shown a
violin, the boy sitting nearest me, who’d been trying to peer up under my hood, got to his feet
and, with a half-hearted ‘Certainly, sir,’ slouched off to the front of the shop and came back with
a tied cluster of some four or five. In response to my question, he said a violin cost five yen and
twenty sen.
      “‘As cheap as that? These must be only toys. Are they all the same price?’
      “‘Yes,’ he answered, ‘all the same price. All exactly the same and all strongly and carefully
constructed.’
      “I took out my purse and extracted from it one five-yen note and a twenty-sen silver coin.
Then I wrapped the violin in a big cloth I’d specially brought for that purpose. Apart from myself
and the inquisitive shop boy, no one in the shop had spoken a word since I entered. They just
sat there watching me. Since my face was well concealed, I knew there was no risk of being
recognized, but I still felt nervous and anxious to get back out to the street as quickly as
possible. At long last, with my cloth wrapped treasure tucked inside my overcoat, I left the
shop.
      ‘Thank you, sir,’ they chorused as I did so, and my blood ran cold.
      Outside, I glanced quickly up and down the street. It was pretty well empty; except that,
perhaps a hundred yards away, I could hear some two or three voices quoting Chinese poems
at each other in accents so loud as to waken the whole town. Edgy as ever and fearing lest the
loudness of the voices forewarned of a troublesome incident with argumentative drunks, I
slipped away westward around the corner of the shop, hurried along beside the moat until I
came out on to Drug King’s Temple Road. Then, passing through Alder Village to the foot of
Mount Kōshin, I at last got back to my lodgings. And the time was ten to two.”
      “Then you’ve been walking practically the whole night long,” exclaimed Beauchamp with his
usual admiring sympathy.
      “So! At long, long last it’s over,” says Waverhouse with impolitely obvious relief. “The way it
went on and on, it was like traveler’s backgammon.”
      “But it’s only now,” protests Coldmoon, “that we come to the really interesting part. So far
it’s only prelude.”
      “More to come? But that’s terrible. You can’t expect the patience of your audience to last
out through a full recital after such an exhausting prelude.”
      “I only hope that, for their own sakes, my audience will bear with me.
      To break off now would be, as the saying has it, to have plowed a field and then to forget
to sow the seed. I shall therefore press on.”
      “My dear chap,” says Waverhouse, “what you decide to say is entirely up to you. For my
part, I shall simply sit and hear whatever it is I’ll hear.”
      “What about you, my revered master? Will you consent to be so gracious as to hearken to
my stumbling tale? May I mention, sir, that I have already bought a violin.”
      “So what are you now proposing? To sell it? I see no reason to listen to an odyssey of
sale.”
      “I am far from selling it.”
      “In that case there’s even less need to listen.”
      “Your decision grieves me. Well then, Beauchamp, it seems that only you have the kindness
and discriminating taste to hear me out. I confess it’s all a bit discouraging. But never mind. I’ll
do my best to be brief.”
      “You needn’t be brief. Take your time. I Find your story fascinating.”
      “Well now, where was I? Ah yes, back safely in my lodgings, the proud possesser after so
many vicissitudes of my precious violin. But my troubles were not over. First, I didn’t know
where to keep it. All sorts of visitors were accustomed to dropping in on me, so I couldn’t just
leave it about the place where they would immediately spot it. If I dug a hole and buried it, it
would have been tiresome to dig it up whenever I wanted to play.”
     “Quite so. Could you perhaps hide it up in the ceiling?”
     “I was lodged in a farmhouse, so the ceilings had no boards.”
     “That was hard. Where did you put it then?”
     “Where do you think I put it?”
     “I’ve no idea. In the space where the storm boards for the windows can be slid away?”
     “No.”
     “Wrapped up in your bed clothes and tucked away in the bedding cupboard?”
     “No.”
     While Beauchamp and Coldmoon continue with their guessing game, my master and
Waverhouse become engrossed in a totally separate conversation. “How do you read these
lines?” my master asked.
     “Which lines?”
     “These two lines here.”
     “What’s this then? Quid aliud est mulier nisi amicitie inimica. . . But it’s Latin.”
     “I know it’s Latin. But how do you read it?”
     “Come off it, Sneaze,” says Waverhouse evasively as his sensitive nose scents danger,
“you’re always bragging about your knowledge of dead languages. Can’t you read it yourself?”
     “Of course I can. Quite easily. But I’m asking you for your reading of this particular text.”
     “You know how to read it, and yet you ask me what it means. That’s a bit thick, you know.”
     “Never mind if it’s thick or thin. Just translate the Latin into English.”
     “Tut-tut. Such giving of orders, such military ways. D’you take me for your batman or
something?”
     “Don’t slide away from the question behind a military smoke screen.
     Just be so good as to let me hear your version of these two lines.”
     “Let’s leave your Latin problems for the moment. I’m keen—aren’t you?—to keep up with
developments in Coldmoon’s extraordinary story. He’s just coming to a crisis point, trembling
between discovery and the successful caching of his treasure. Am I not right, Coldmoon?
     Well, how then did you cope with your dilemma?” Waverhouse evinces a sudden new
enthusiasm for Coldmoon’s fantasy on a violin and moves over to rejoin the fiddle group. My
wretched master, I regret to say, is left alone with his text.
     Encouraged by this unexpected attention, Coldmoon proceeded to explain where he’d
hidden his violin. “I ended up,” he said, “by smuggling it away into the old, varnished, wicker box
that my grandmother had given me for storing clothes when I’d first left home. It was her
parting gift to me, and she herself I seem to remember, brought it into the family as part of her
own bridal gear.”
     “Such an antique would hardly seem to sort with a brand-new violin.
     What do you think, Beauchamp?”
     “I agree they sound a poor match.”
     “But you yourself suggested the ceiling, and that,” said Coldmoon, squashing Beauchamp,
“is hardly a good match either.”
     “Despite the oddity of Coldmoon’s hideyhole, his decision strikes me as the very stuff of
haiku. So let’s not start a squabble. How about this?
In an ancient, wicker box a hidden violin:
    A feeling of utter lonesomeness
    As the autumn closes in.”



      “Today you’re fairly oozing with little squibs.”
      “Not just today. Day in, day out, they well up in my mind. My knowledge of the art is so
profound that even the late, great Masaoka Shiki was struck dumb by its depth.”
      “Goodness, did you know Shiki?” asked the honest-hearted Beauchamp. His voice rose in
serious enquiry and he sounded thrilled actually to know someone who had known the late,
great, master poet.
      “We were never physically close,” said Waverhouse, “but we were always directly in warm
contact by a kind of spiritual telepathy.” Shocked, even disgusted, by this ridiculous answer,
Beauchamp fell silent.
      Coldmoon merely smiled and went on with his own improbable story. “Having decided on
how to hide it, my next problem was how to make use of it. I foresaw no trouble about taking it
out from its wicker box and looking at it, but such mere gloating would hardly suffice. I needed
to be able actually to play it. But the resulting sounds would scarcely pass unnoticed. Therein
lay a particular danger because the leading bully-boy of those damnable Dregs happened to
lodge in the boarding house immediately south of mine: the two buildings were, in fact,
separated only by a scrawny hedge consisting of a single row of Roses of Sharon.”
      “That was stinking luck,” Beauchamp chimes in sympathetically.
      “Stinking luck indeed. For one cannot mask a telltale sound. As we all well know, the
whereabouts of the luckless Lady Kogō were betrayed to the vengeful Taira by the sound of
her harp. If,” says Waverhouse, “you were merely guzzling stolen food or faking paper money,
that could be managed, but one cannot scrape a fiddle and keep one’s presence hidden.”
      “If only my fiddle made no sound, I could have gotten away with it. . .”
      “You speak as though sound were the only betrayer, but there are soundless things which
still can not be hidden. I remember that years ago, when we were self-catering students
lodging in a temple over in Koishikawa, one of our gang, a certain Suzuki Tō, was passionately
fond of sweetened, cooking saké. He used to keep it in a beer bottle, never offered it around
but swigged it all by himself. One day, when Suzuki was out for a walk, the otherwise decent
Sneaze, very unwisely, nicked Suzuki’s bottle, took a couple of gulps and then. . .”
      “That’s a flat lie. I never touched Suzuki’s stuff. It was always you who were knocking it
back,” exclaimed my master suddenly and in a loud voice.
      “Oh, so you’re still with us, are you? I’d thought you were so busy in your book that I could
safely tell these terrible truths without fear of interruption by the guilty party. But all the time you
were listening.
      Which just shows what a sneaky, saké sneaking sort of fellow you are.
      One talks of people who are equally skilled in thought and action.
      Thought and faction are more your style. I don’t deny that, now and again, I took a modest
nip from Suzuki’s bottle. But you were the villain who got found out. And how did you come to
be caught? Just listen to this, you two. We all know, don’t we, that our miserable host is
anyway incapable of serious drinking. Alcohol! He just can’t take it. But just because that
cooking saké belonged to someone else, he slugged it down as though his life depended on it.
Imagine what inevitably followed. His face swelled up and turned a ghastly red. It was a most
fearsome sight.”
      “Pipe down,Waverhouse! You can’t even read Latin.”
      “That’s a laugh! You want a laugh? Then listen to the sequel. When Suzuki got back, he
made a beeline for his grog, lifted the bottle, shook it, and immediately discovered it was more
than half empty. Sneaze had really given it a hammering. Of course Suzuki realized that
someone had been at it and, when he looked around, there was Sneaze flat out in a corner, as
stiff and dully scarlet as some crude, clay doll.”
      Remembering that ludicrous incident, Waverhouse exploded into raucous laughter and the
others joined in. Even my master chuckled into his book. Only Singleman seems proof against
low comedy. He’s probably overstrained his Zen-besotted mind with all those bits of stone. In
any event, slumped down across the board, he’s fallen fast asleep.
      When his guffaws had ended,Waverhouse began again, “I remember another occasion
when a noiseless action nevertheless betrayed itself. I’d gone,” he said, “to a hot spring inn at
Ubako where I found myself sharing a room with some old man who was, I believe, a retired
draper from Tokyo. Since he was no more to me than a temporary roommate, it hardly matters
whether he was a retired draper or a practicing second-hand clothes dealer, but I thought you’d
like a bit of background detail.
      In any event, he got me into trouble. That is to say, after some three days at the inn I ran
out of cigarettes. Ubako is an out-of-the-way place, miles up in the mountains with only a single
inn and absolutely nothing else.
      One can eat and one can bathe in the hot springs. But that’s all. Imagine what it’s like to run
out of fags in Ubako. It put me under strain. When one is deprived of something, one begins to
crave for it as never before.
      Though I’m not much of a smoker, the moment I realized I was out of cigarettes I found
myself aching for a puff. What made it worse was that the old man had brought with him a big
stock of cigarettes carefully bundled up in a carrying cloth, from which he would take out
several at a time, squat down right in front of me, and chain-smoke like a sooted chimney. If
he’d smoked in an ordinary decently human sort of way, I would not have hated him so
passionately, but he flaunted his tobacco wealth. He made smoke rings, blew the fumes out
forward, sideways, straight up at the ceiling, in and out of his nostrils, and almost out of his
ears until I could have killed him. Some men are born show-offs. This man was a smoke-off.”
      “What d’you mean, a smoke-off?”
      “If you flaunt your clothes or jewelry, you’re a show-off; if you flaunt your fags, you’re a
smoke-off.”
      “If it put you through such agony, why didn’t you simply ask him to let you have a few of his
cigarettes?”
      “There are things a man can’t do. To beg, I am ashamed.”
      “So it’s wrong to ask for a cigarette?”
      “Perhaps not actually sinful, but I could never beg.”
      “Then what did you do?”
      “As a matter of fact, I stole.”
      “Oh, dear!”
      “When the old man, clutching his personal hand towel, tottered off for a hot spring bath, I
knew my chance had come. I looted his hoard and I smoked and smoked and smoked as fast
as I could go. Just as I was smirking to myself, partly with the pleasure of smoking, partly with
the even greater self-satisfaction of the successful thief the door opened and there he was
again.”
      “What happened to his bath?”
      “Oh, he was certainly planning to take it, but when he’d gone some way down the corridor
he suddenly remembered he’d left his purse behind so he came back to get it. Damn cheek! As
if I’d steal someone’s purse. . .”
      “Well, wouldn’t you? You seem to have been pretty quick with his cigarettes.”
      “You must be joking. That’s not the same at all. Anyway, apart from his disgraceful behavior
in that matter of the purse, the old man proved a person of real feeling. When he opened the
door, the room was thick with at least two days worth of cigarette smoke. Ill news travels fast,
they say. It didn’t take him long to read the situation.”
      “Did he say anything?”
      “He hadn’t lived all those years without growing more shrewd than that. Saying nothing, he
wrapped some fifty or sixty cigarettes in a piece of paper; then, turning to me, he courteously
observed, ‘Do please forgive their miserable quality, but if these cigarettes could be of any use
to you, I’d be honored if you’d accept them.’Then he went off down to the bath.”
      “Perhaps that’s what’s meant by ‘the Tokyo style.’”
      “I don’t know if it’s Tokyo style or draper’s style; anyway, after that incident, the old man
and I became firm friends and we spent a most enjoyable two weeks together.”
      “With free fags for a fortnight?”
      “Since you ask me, yes.”
      My master finds it difficult to give in gracefully, but he sometimes tries. He accordingly
closed his book, rolled off his stomach and said, as he sat up, “Have you finished with that
violin?”
      “Not yet. We’re just coming to the interesting part, so do please listen. As for that person
flaked out on the go board—what was his name?—What? Singleman? Well, I’d like him to
listen, too. It’s bad for him to sleep so much. Surely it’s time we woke him up.”
      “Hey, Singleman, wake up. Wake up. This is an interesting story. Do wake up. They say it’s
bad for you to sleep so much. Your wife is getting anxious.”
      “Eh?” Singleman lifted up his face. Slobber had dribbled down his goatee to leave a long
shining line as if a slug had trailed its slime across him. “I was sleeping,” he managed to get
out, “like a white cloud on the mountain top. I’ve had a delightful nap.”
      “We’ve all seen how delightfully you sleep. Suppose you wake up now.”
      “I expect it’s time I woke. Has anyone had anything to say worth hearing?”
      “Coldmoon’s been telling us about his violin. He’s just about to. . .
      What was it he was going to do? Come on, Sneaze. What was it?”
      “I haven’t the foggiest idea.”
      Coldmoon intervened. “I am,” he said, ‘just about to play it.”
      “He’s going to play his violin at last. Come over here and join us as we listen.”
      “Still that violin? Bother.”
      “You’ve no cause to be bothered because you’re one of those people who only play on
stringless harps; Coldmoon here has every reason to be bothered out of his tiny skull because
his screeching squawks are heard all over the neighborhood.”
      “Ah, yes? Coldmoon, don’t you yet know how to play a violin without being heard by your
neighbors?”
     “No, I don’t. If there is such a way, I’d very much like to learn about it.”
     “There’s really nothing to learn. Just concentrate, as all the Zen masters advise, on the
pure, white cow which stands there in the alley.
     Desire will drop away from you and, as enlightenment occurs, you’ll find you already know
how soundless music can be played. And because you’ll already know, you’ll have no need to
learn.” Singleman’s distorted messages from the Gateless Gate, even when he’s wide awake,
are usually incomprehensible.
     But Coldmoon simply assumed that the man babbled like that because his brains were still
floating about somewhere in the land of Nod. So he deliberately ignored him and continued with
his story. “After long thought I devised a plan. The next day, being the Emperor’s Birthday, was
a national holiday and I proposed to spend it in bed. But I felt restless all day long and I kept
getting up, first to lift and then to replace the lid of my wicker box. When, in due course, the
daylight faded and the crickets in the bottom of my grandmother’s parting gift began to chirrup,
I took my courage in both hands and lifted the violin and its bow from their biding place.”
     “At wonderful last,” chirruped Beauchamp, “Coldmoon’s going to play.”
     “Take it easy, now,” warns Waverhouse. “Gently, gently, Coldmoon.
     Don’t do anything hasty. Let caution rule your twilight.”
     “First I took out the bow and examined it from its tip to its guard. . .”
     “You sound like some half-witted seller of swords,” chaffed Waverhouse.
     “If you can take a bow in your hands and feel that it is your own soul that you’re holding,
then you will have achieved that same spiritual condition which transfuses a samurai when he
unsheathes his white-honed blade and dotes upon it in the failing light of autumn. Holding that
bow in my hands I trembled like a leaf.”
     “Ah, what a genius!” sighs Beauchamp.
     “Ah, what an epileptic,” adds Waverhouse tartly.
     “Please,” said my master, “please get on with playing it. And right away. Now.”
     Singleman makes a wry face as though acknowledging the pointless-ness of trying to bring
light to the invincibly ignorant.
     “Happily the bow proved in perfect condition. Next I took the violin and, holding it close
under the lamp, examined its front and back. All these preparations had taken about five
minutes. Please now try to picture the scene. Tirelessly, from the bottom of their box, the
crickets are still chirruping. . .”
     “We’ll imagine anything you like. Set your mind at rest, take up your precious instrument
and play.”
     “No, not yet. Now I have checked it over and, like its bow, the violin is flawless. All is
wonderfully well. I spring to my feet. . .”
     “Are you going out?”
     “Oh, do keep quiet and listen. I cannot tell this story if you keep interrupting every single
phrase. . .”
     “Gentlemen! We are to be silent. Hush!” calls Waverhouse commandingly.
     “It’s you yourself who do the interrupting.”
     “Oh, I see. I beg your pardon. Pray carry on.”
     “With the violin beneath my arm, soft-soled sandals on my feet, I had taken some few
steps beyond the outer glass door of my lodgings when. . .”
     “I knew it. I knew it. I knew in my bones there was going to be a breakdown. Coldmoon
cannot walk two steps or breathe two minutes without a hitch or hang-up.”
     “I suppose you do realize,” said my master at his most sarcastic, “that there are no more
dried persimmons hanging from the eaves. Even if you’re now very hungry there’s no point in
turning home for them.”
     “It is highly regrettable that two such scholars as you and you”—Coldmoon nodded at
Waverhouse and Sneaze— “should persist in behaving like common hecklers. I shall have to
address my further remarks to Mr. Beauchamp only. Now, Beauchamp, as I was saying, though
I had left my lodgings, I was obliged to turn back for something I should need. Thereafter,
having draped around my head a scarlet blanket (for which I’d paid three yen and twenty sen in
my own hometown before I left it years before), I blew out the lamp. Unfortunately, in the
consequent pitch darkness I could not find my sandals.”
     “But why did you want to go out? Where were you off to?”
     “Patience, patience. I shall come to that. At long last, outside in my scarlet blanket, my
violin beneath my coat, I again found myself as on the previous night, ankle deep in fallen
leaves under a star lit sky. I turned away to the right and, as I came to the foot of Mount Ko-
shin, the boom of the temple bell on Eastern Peak struck through my blanket shrouded ears
and penetrated to my inmost head. Beauchamp, can you guess what time it was?”
     “This is your story, Coldmoon. I’ve no idea what the time was.”
     “Beauchamp, it is nine; nine and the evening chill. I am now climbing through the early
autumn darkness along a mountain path which rises nearly three thousand feet to a sort of
terrace plateau which the locals call Big Flat. Timid as I am, at any other time I’d have been
scared clean out of my wits, but it’s one of those strange things that, when the mind is truly
concentrated upon one specific aim, all sense of being frightened or not frightened is wiped
from one’s heart. Odd as it must sound, I had become a lion-heart by virtue of my single-
minded lust to play a fiddle. This place, Big Flat, is a famous beauty spot on the south flank of
Mount Ko-shin. Looking down from there on a fine day, one can see through the red pines the
whole layout of the castle town below. I’d guess the level area must cover some four hundred
square yards and, smack in the middle of it, a large, flat rock protrudes to form a low fifteen-
square-yard platform. On the north side of Big Flat there’s a swampy pond called Cormorant’s
Marsh, and around the pond there’s nothing but a thick stand of quite enormous camphor trees,
each one no less than three arm-spans around. The place is deep in the mountains and the only
sign of man is a small hut used by the camphor gatherers.
     Even by day the pond oppresses the visitor with its air of sodden gloom.
     Remote as it is, Big Flat is not too hard to visit because, on some long-ago maneuvres, the
Corps of Engineers cut a pathway up the mountain-side. When I finally reached the flat rock, I
spread out my scarlet blanket and sat down on it. I’d never climbed up here before on a night
so cold and, as my pulse steadied, I began to feel the surrounding loneliness encroach upon me
as a kind of cramp creeping ever deeper into my belly. When one is thus alone in the mountains
the sheer intensity of that loneliness can fill the mind with a feeling of terror; but if that feeling
can be emptied away, all that remains in the mind is an extraordinary sense of icy crystalline
clarity. For some twenty minutes I sat there on my scarlet rug completely abstracted from my
normal self and feeling as though I were totally alone in a palace of pure crystal. It was as
though every bit of me, my body, even my soul, had become transparent, as if made of some
kind of quartz, and I could no longer tell whether I was inside that palace of crystal or that
freezing palace was within my belly.”
     Not quite sure how to react to Coldmoon’s strange account, Waverhouse contented himself
with a style of teasing more demure than his mocking wont. “How terrible,” he said. Singleman,
however, was genuinely impressed by Coldmoon’s personal report of a state of consciousness
not unknown to many meditation sects. “Quite extraordinary,” he observed. “Most interesting.”
     “Had my condition of cold translucency persisted, I might well have stayed frozen on that
rock until I melted in the morning sun. Then I should never have played my violin.”
     “Have there been any earlier reports,” Beauchamp asked, “to suggest that Big Flat might
be haunted? You know, by foxes, badgers, or any other such shape-changing creatures?”
     “As I was saying, I couldn’t even tell whether I was my own self or not, and I scarcely knew
if I were alive or dead when suddenly I heard a harsh screaming cry from the far end of the old
marsh.”
     “Aha,” says Waverhouse, “things are happening.”
     “This awful cry, like a blast of autumn wind tossing the treetops, echoed away far and deep
across the entire mountain; at its sound, I came to myself with a jerk.”
     “What a relief!” sighed Waverhouse, heaving a grotesquely simulated sigh.
     “As the masters say, ‘One must perish into life.’ Isn’t that so, Coldmoon?” Even Singleman,
who winked as he offered his observation, now seems disposed to treat his friend’s spiritual
experience in the spirit of light farce. However, his Zen reference was completely lost on
Coldmoon.
     “Having been thus startled back into my usual self, I looked around me. The whole vast
mountain was now dead quiet: nothing, not even the drip of a raindrop, could be heard. What
then was that ghastly cry? Too piercing to have been human, too loud for any bird. Could it
have been a monkey? But around there there aren’t any monkeys. What on earth could it have
been? Once that question had entered my head and I began to search around for its answer,
all the demons of misgiving who had hitherto lain quiet in the crannies of my mind erupted into
pandemonium. You remember how the city crowds went wild, people running here and there
and even all over each other in a lunacy of welcome, when Prince Arthur of Connaught came to
Tokyo in February 1906? Well, inside my head it was worse than that. And then things suddenly
came to a crisis. I felt my very pores gape open and through their yawn my body’s flightiest
visitors—Courage, Pluck, Prudence, and Composure departed from me. Like cheap alcohol
blown in a spray on hairy shins to cool them, my visitors evaporated. Under my ribs my heart
began to hammer. It leapt and danced like a red frog. My legs trembled like the humming
strings of a kite. And my nerve broke. In mindless panic I grabbed my scarlet blanket around
my head and, with the violin clutched beneath one arm, I scrambled down from the low flat rock
and helter-skelter fled away down the rough mountain path. When, scampering like a rat
through the layers of dead leaves, I came at last to my lodgings, I crept in quietly and hid
myself in my bed. I had been so exhausted by terror that I fell immediately asleep. D’you know,
Beauchamp, that was the most terrifying experience of my whole life.”
     “And then?”
     “That’s it. There isn’t any more.”
     “No playing of the violin?”
     “How could I possibly have played? If you had heard that eldritch cry, I bet my boots the
last thing you’d have thought about would be playing a violin.”
     “I find your story less than satisfactory.”
     “Perhaps so, but it was the truth.” Coldmoon, vastly pleased with himself, surveyed his
audience. “Well,” he said, “and what did you think of it?”
     “Excellent. A point well taken,” laughed Waverhouse. “You really must have gone through
great travail to bring your story to that remarkable conclusion. In fact, I’ve been following your
account with the closest attention, for it seemed increasingly clear to me that, in the person of
yourself, these Eastern climes have perhaps been visited by a male reincarnation of Sandra
Belloni.” Waverhouse paused in the obvious hope that someone would give him an opportunity
to air his knowledge of Meredith’s heroine by asking for clarification of this obscure reference.
But all the members of his audience, having been caught that way before, held their peace; so
Waverhouse, regrettably uncued, simply rattled on. “Just as Sandra Belloni’s harp playing and
Italian song in a moonlit forest called down the goddess of that silver orb, so Coldmoon’s near
performance with a violin upon the ledges of Mount Ko-shin called up some phantom badger
from a fen. There is, of course, a difference of degree but the principle’s the same. What I find
peculiarly interesting is that such a slight difference in degree should produce so vast a
difference in result: in Sandra’s case a manifestation of ethereal beauty, but in Coldmoon’s
nothing but crude and earthy farce. That must have been a painful disappointment to you.”
     “No disappointment at all,” said Coldmoon who seemed genuinely uninterested, perhaps not
in his own weird experience, but certainly in Waverhouse’s question.
     “Trying to play a violin on a mountain top! What effete behavior! It serves you right that you
got scared silly.” My master’s scathing comment showed his usual lack of sympathy with
anything beyond the world of his own wizened imagination.
     Singleman piped in:

    “How more than pitiful it is to find
    That one must live one’s human life confined
    Within a world of an inhuman kind.”



      None of Singleman’s mangled quotations from the works of deluded medieval
metaphysicians ever makes the least sense to Coldmoon. Or to anyone else. Perhaps not even
to Singleman. His words were left to float away into the nothingness of a long silence.
      After a while, Waverhouse changed the subject by asking, “Incidentally, Coldmoon, are you
still haunting the university in order to polish your little, glass balls?”
      “No. My visit home rather interrupted things. Indeed, I doubt if I’ll ever resume that line of
research. It was always, if you’ll pardon the joke, something of a grind, and lately I’ve been
finding it a real bore.”
      “But without your polished beads, you won’t get your doctorate,” says my master, looking
slightly worried.
      Coldmoon seems no more concerned about his doctorate than he was with his failure to
become a Japanese version of Sandra Belloni. “Oh that,” he says with a careless laugh. “I’ve
no longer any need for a degree.”
      “But then the marriage will be canceled and both sides will be upset.”
      “Marriage? Whose marriage?”
      “Yours.”
     “To whom am I supposed to be getting married?”
     “To the Goldfield girl.”
     “Really?”
     “But surely you’ve already plighted your troth?”
     “I’ve never plighted anything. I had no part in the spread of that particular rumor.”
     “That’s a bit thick,” says my master. “I say, Waverhouse, you, too, remember that incident,
don’t you?”
     “Incident? You mean that business when the Nose came shoving herself in here? If so, it’s
not just you and I who’ve heard about the engagement, but the world and his wife have long
been in on the secret. As a matter of fact, I’m constantly being pestered by some quite
respectable newspapers who want me to let them know when they may have the honor of
printing photographs of Coldmoon and his blushing Opula in their Happy Couples column.
What’s more, Beauchamp there finished his epic epithalamium, ‘A Song of Lovebirds,’ at least
three months ago and has since been waiting anxiously to learn the right date for its publication.
You don’t want your masterpiece to rot in the ground like buried treasure just because
Coldmoon’s grown bored with buffing up his little, glass beads, do you, Beauchamp, eh?”
     “There’s no question of pushing for early publication. Of course, my very heart and soul
have gone into that poem, but I am happily convinced that it will remain suitable for publication
at any appropriate time.”
     “There, you see: the question of whether or not you take your degree has wide and
potentially painful repercussions. So, pull yourself together. Get those beads rubbed spherical.
Polish the whole thing off.”
     “I like the joke in your phrasing, and I’m truly sorry if I’ve given any of you cause to worry.
But I really do not any longer need a doctorate.”
     “Why not?”
     “Because I have already got my own wife.”
     “I say, that’s grand! When did this secret marriage take place? Life is certainly full of
surprises. Well, Sneaze, as you’ve just heard, Coldmoon has apparently acquired a wife and
children.”
     “No children yet. It would be terrible if a child were born after less than a month of
marriage.”
     “But when and where did you ever get married?” demanded my master as though he were
the presiding judge at some official court of inquiry.
     “As a matter of fact, during my recent trip home. She was there waiting for me. Those
dried bonitos were one of the wedding presents from her relatives.”
     “Three miserable dried bonitos! That was rather a stingy gift.”
     “No, no. There were scads of them. I only brought you three.”
     “So your bride is from your own home district? Does it then follow that she’s on the dark
skinned side?”
     “Yes, she’s dark complexioned. Exactly right for me.”
     “And what are you going to do about the Goldfields?”
     “Nothing.”
     “But you can’t just leave things, poof like that,” my master bleated.
     “What do you think,Waverhouse?”
     “I think he can. The girl will marry someone else. After all, marriage is little more than two
people bumping against each other in the dark.
     If they cannot manage such bumping by themselves, other people contrive their blind
collision. It doesn’t much matter who bumps whom. In my opinion, the only person deserving
our tears and pity is the unfortunate author of ‘A Song of Lovebirds.’”
     “Thank you, but please don’t worry. My epithalamium, as it stands, is perfectly suitable for
dedication to Coldmoon on the already achieved occasion of his marriage. I can easily write
another when Opula gets wed.”
     “Ah, that marvelous, heartless professionalism of the true poet,” sighed Waverhouse,
“whipping out a masterpiece at the drop of a hat.
     Easy as a wink of an eye. One’s heart is cramped with jealousy.”
     “Have you notified the Goldfields?” My master is still touchingly concerned about the
feelings of that granite clan.
     “No, and why should I? I never proposed to the girl or asked her father for her hand in
marriage. I have no reason whatsoever to say a single word to either of them. Moreover, I’m
sure they’ve already learned the last least detail from those dozens of detectives they employ.”
     My master’s face, as the word “detectives” entered his ear, immediately turned sour.
“You’re right, Coldmoon, tell such people nothing,” and he proceeded to offer the following
comments on detectives as though they were all weighty arguments against observing the
proprieties in handling a broken engagement. “Persons who snatch property from the unwary in
the streets are called pickpockets; those who snitch the thoughts of the unwary are called
detectives. Those who jimmy open your doors and windows are called thieves; those who use
leading questions to lever out one’s private thoughts are called detectives. Those who
threateningly jab their swords into one’s floor matting as a way of forcing the surrender of
money are called armed burglars; those who by the jabbing menace of their words force one
into admissions against one’s will are called detectives. To my way of thinking, it inexorably
follows that pickpockets, thieves, armed burglars, and detectives are all spawn of the same
subhuman origin, things unfit to be treated even as men.
     Their every endeavor should be thwarted and they themselves quite mercilessly put down.”
     “Don’t work yourself into such a lather. I’m not frightened by detectives, even though they
should appear by the battalion. Let all be warned with whom they will be dealing. Am I not the
King of the Glass Ball Polishers, Avalon Coldmoon B.Sc.?”
     “Bravo! Well spoken! That’s the stuff to give ’em! Just the spirited words one would expect
from a newly married bachelor of science. However, Sneaze,” Waverhouse continued, “if you
categorize detectives with such grubs as pickpockets, thieves, and common robbers, where do
you place a creature such as Goldfield who gives employment to such vermin?”
     “Perhaps a modern version of that long departed villain, Kumasaka Cho-han.”
     “Oh yes, I like that. Cho-han, as I recall it, was said to have disappeared when he was
sliced in half. But our modern version over the way, squatting on a fortune made by blatant
usury, is so intensely alive in his meanness and sharp greediness that, cut in a million pieces,
he’d reappear as a million Cho-han clones. It would be a lifelong source of trouble if such a
blood-sucking creature ever came to believe he had a bone to pick with you. So be careful,
Coldmoon.”
     “To hell with that! I shall face him down with the sort of speech you hear from heros of the
Ho-sho- style of Noh play. You know what I mean.
     ‘Pretentious thief though well aware of my fearsome reputation, you yet dare break into my
house.’ That should stop him short.” Coldmoon, unwisely careless of the real dangers he might
have to cope with from a vengeful Goldfield, strikes a series of dramatic poses.
      “Talking of detectives, I wonder why it is that nearly everyone nowadays tends to behave
as detectives do.” In strict accordance with his usual style, Singleman begins his observations
by reference to the matters under discussion and then veers off into complete irrelevance.
      “Perhaps,” says Coldmoon kindly, “it’s because of the high cost of living.”
      Beauchamp mounts his hobbyhorse. “I myself believe it’s because we have lost our feeling
for art.”
      “It’s because the horns of modern civilization are sprouting from the human head and the
irritations of that growth, like nettles in one’s underwear, are driving us mad.” It’s a pity that
Waverhouse, who is both well-read and intelligent, still should strive to be merely clever.
      When it came to my master’s turn, he opened the following lecture with an air of enormous
self-importance. “I have, of late, devoted considerable thought to this topic and I have
concluded that the current marked trend toward detective-mindedness is entirely caused by the
individual permitting himself too strong a realization of the self. By that I do not mean self-
realization of the spiritual nature which Singleman pursues in his Zen search for his ‘unborn
face,’ that self he was before he contrived to be born. Nor do I mean that other form of Zen
self-realization where, by either gradual or sudden enlightenment, the mind perceives its own
identity with heaven and earth. . .”
      “Dear, dear, this is becoming rather heavy going. But if Sneaze, you really do propose to
make an exhaustive and scholarly analysis of the psychological maladies of our times, I feel
that I,Waverhouse in person, must be granted an opportunity to lodge a full complaint against
the civilization I seek to grace.”
      “You are always free to say what you like. But generally you don’t say anything. You just
talk.”
      “On the contrary, I have a very great deal to say. It was you, Sneaze, who, only a brief
week back, fell down and worshiped a police detective. Yet here you are today, making ugly
comparisons between detectives and pickpockets. You are an incarnation of the principle of
contradiction. Whereas I am a man who, through every earlier life right to this present day of
my present incarnation, has never wavered in the certi-tudes of my opinions.”
      “Police detectives are police detectives. The other day is the other day. And today’s today.
Never to change one’s opinions is to demonstrate a petrifaction of mind that prevents its least
development. To be, as Confucius put it in the Analects, willfully ignorant beyond all hope of
education, is, my dear Waverhouse, to be you.”
      “That’s really rather rude. Still, even a detective when he tries to speak his honest mind can
be rather sweet.”
      “Are you calling me a detective?”
      “I simply meant to say that, since you are not a detective, you’re an honest man, and that
that’s good. There, there. No more quarrels. Let’s listen to the rest of your formidable
argument.”
      “The heightened self-awareness of our contemporaries means that they realize only too
well the wide gap between their own interests and those of other people; as the advance of
civilization daily widens that gap, so this so-called self-awareness intensifies to a point where
everyone becomes incapable of natural or unaffected behavior. William Henley, the English
poet, once said that his friend Robert Louis Stevenson was so continuously unable to forget
himself that, if he happened to be in a room with a mirror on the wall, he could not pass in front
of the glass without stopping to study his reflection. Stevenson’s condition is a telling example
of the general modern trend. Because this overweening consciousness of self never lets up, not
even when one sleeps, it is inevitable that our speech and behavior should have become forced
and artificial. We impose constrictions on ourselves and, in that process, inhibitions on society.
In short, we conduct our whole lives as if we were two young people at their first meeting in the
context of a marriage negotiation. Words such as serenity and self-composure have become no
more than so many meaningless strokes of a writing brush.
     It is in this sense that people nowadays have become like detectives and burglars. A
detective’s job is essentially to make profit by being sneaky and self-effacing; only by cultivating
an intense awareness of himself can he even believe in his own existence. To no less a degree
the rapacious burglar is obsessed with me, me, me, because the thought of what will happen to
him if he’s caught is never out of his mind. Modern man, even in his deepest slumber, never
stops thinking about what will bring him profit or, even more worrying, loss. Consequently, as
with the burglar and the detective, his self-absorption grows daily more absolute.
     Modern man is jittery and sneaky. Morning, noon, and night he sneaks and jitters and
knows no peace. Not one single moment’s peace until the cold grave takes him. That’s the
condition to which our so-called civilization has brought us. And what a mess it is.”
     “Most interesting. A penetrating analysis of our case,” says Singleman who rarely resists
any opportunity to thicken the clouds when high flown, cloudy matters are discussed. “I
consider Sneaze’s explanation is very much to the point. In the old days, a man was taught to
forget himself. Today it is quite different: he is taught not to forget himself and he accordingly
spends his days and nights in endless self-regard. Who can possibly know peace in such an
eternally burning hell? The apparent realities of this awful world, even the beastliness of being,
are all symptoms of that sickness for which the only cure lies in learning to forget the self. This
dire situation is well summarized in that ancient Chinese poem whose author was one of those



    Who simply sit and, sitting all night through
    Under a drifting moon, themselves withdrew
    Themselves from Self and thereby came to be
    Free of the world and from all Being free.



Modern man lacks naturalness even when performing acts of genuine kindness. The English, as
is well-known, are vastly proud of being nice, both in the sense of their refined behavior and in
the sense of common kindness; however, one may fairly suspect the hearts behind the niceness
of the English as packed with self-regard. Perhaps I might remind you of the story of that
member of the English royal family who, during some visit to India, was invited to a banquet.
Among those present was an Indian prince who, momentarily forgetful of the nature of the
occasion but perfectly naturally in terms of Indian custom, reached out for a potato, picked it up
in his fingers and put it on his plate. Realizing his gaffe, he was terribly ashamed. But the
English gentleman, immediately and with apparently equal naturalness, proceeded to help
himself to potatoes with his fingers. An act of the most refined and kindly politeness? Or an act
so-seeming but ultimately taken in order that it should be remembered, as it clearly has been,
to the enhancement of English royalty?”
     “Is it the English custom,” asks Coldmoon, missing the point of the story, “to eat potatoes
with their fingers?”
     Disregarding Coldmoon’s question, my master spoke. “I’ve heard another such story about
the English. On some occasion at their barracks in England a group of regimental officers gave
a dinner in honor of one of their non-commissioned officers. Toward the end of the meal, when
finger bowls filled with water were placed in front of each diner, the non-commissioned officer,
a man not used to banquets, lifted the bowl to his mouth and swallowed the water down in a
single gulp.
     Immediately, the colonel of the regiment raised his own finger bowl in a toast to the non-
commissioned officer’s health and gulped its water down. His lead was promptly followed by
every officer present.”
     “I wonder if you’ve heard this one,” says Waverhouse who does not like to remain silent.
“When Carlyle was presented to the queen, he, being an eccentric and anyway a man totally
unschooled in court procedures, suddenly sat down on a chair. All the chamberlains and ladies-
in-waiting standing ranged behind the queen began to giggle. Well, not quite. They were about
to start giggling when the queen turned around toward them and signaled them also to be
seated. Carlyle was thus saved from any embarrassment. I confess I find this courtly courtesy
somewhat elaborate.”
     “I don’t suppose,” said Coldmoon rather shortly, “that, being the man he was, Carlyle would
have been the least embarrassed if only he and the queen were seated while all the rest stayed
standing.”
     “To be self-aware when one is actually being kind to other people may be all right,”
Singleman started up again, “but being self-aware does make it that much harder to be
genuinely kind. It is widely held that the advance of civilization brings with it a moderation of
combative spirit and a general easing of relationships between individuals. But that’s all
nonsense. When individual awareness grows so strong, how can mutual gentleness be
expected? It’s true of course that modern relationships seem superficially calm and easy-going,
but they are in fact extremely tough; rather like the relationship between two sumo wrestlers
who, immobilized by cross-grips in the middle of the ring, are nevertheless butting each other
with their vast potbellies as hard as they can heave.”
     “In former times disputes were settled by the relatively healthy means of brute force,
whereas nowadays the means and mentality have become so specialized that the intensity of
the combatant’s self-awareness has inevitably increased,” says Waverhouse, taking it to be
now his turn to talk. “Sir Francis Bacon observed in his Novum Organum that one can only
triumph over nature by obeying the laws of nature. Is it not peculiar that modern quarrels so
closely follow the pattern identified by Bacon in that, as in a jūjutsu contest, one defeats one’s
opponent by an exploitation of that opponent’s own strength.”
     “Or again, it is, I suppose, something like the generation of hydro-electricity. One makes no
effort to oppose the flow of water, but merely diverts its force into the production of power.”
     Coldmoon had obviously only just begun to express an interesting idea, but Singleman
butted in to add, “And therefore, when one is poor, one is tied by poverty; when rich, entrapped
in wealth; when worried, tangled by anxiety; and when happy, dizzied by happiness. A talented
man falls at the hand of talent, a man of wisdom is defeated by wisdom, and a quick-tempered
man like Sneaze is quickly provoked into rashness and goes rushing headlong out into the
deadfalls dug by his artful enemies.”
     “Here, here,” cried Waverhouse clapping his hands. And when my master, actually grinning,
said, “Well, you won’t in practice catch me quite as simply as that,” everyone burst out
laughing.
     “By the way, I wonder what sort of thing would finish off a fearful fellow like Goldfield?”
     “His wife will obviously be toppled over by the weight of her nose, while the hardness of his
heart will crush that usurer to death. His henchmen will be trampled to death by stampeding
detectives.”
     “And the daughter?”
     “Well, I’m not sure about her, and I have never in fact clapped eyes on her. But it seems
likely that she’ll be suffocated by clothes or food or even drinking. I can’t imagine that she’ll die
of love, though I suppose she might end up as a roadside beggar like that fabled beauty O-no-
no-Komachi.”
     “That’s a bit unkind,” objected Beauchamp who, after all, had written some new-style
poems for the girl.
     “And therein lies the importance of the moral injunction that one must have a merciful heart
and never lose one’s subjectivity. Unless one reaches and sustains that condition of mind, one
will suffer torment throughout eternity.” That benighted Singleman waffles on as usual as though
he were the sole proprietor of enlightenment.
     “Don’t be such a moralizing twerp. The chances are,” said Waverhouse, “that you will meet
your just deserts upside-down in one of your own oft-quoted flashes of Zen lightning. In the
spring, of course.”
     “One thing at least is certain,” said my master. “If civilization continues its rapid
development along its present lines, I would not wish to live and witness it.”
     “The choice is yours. As Seneca advises, no man should carp at life when the road to
freedom runs down every vein. Why don’t you do yourself in?”Waverhouse helpfully enquired.
     “I care rather less for dying than I do for living.”
     “No one seems to pay much attention when he’s being born, but everybody makes no end
of a fuss about his departure.” Coldmoon offers his own cool comment.
     “It’s the same with money,” says Waverhouse. “When one borrows money, one does so
lightly, but everyone worries like crazy when it comes to paying it back.”
     “Happy are they who don’t worry about repayment; as happy as those who do not worry
about death,” intoned Singleman in his most lofty and unworldly style.
     “I suppose you’d argue that the bravest in the face of death are those who are most
enlightened?”
     “Most certainly. Perhaps you know the Zen phrase ‘The iron-ox-heart of an iron-ox-face: the
ox-iron-heart of an ox-iron-face?’”
     “And are you claiming to be so ox-and-iron-hearted?” Waverhouse, who happened to know
that the phrase meant to have a heart so strong as to be undisturbed by anything, doubted that
Singleman would dare make such a claim.
     “Well, no, I wouldn’t go that far. But,” said Singleman for no very obvious reason, “the fact
remains that neurasthenia was an unknown ailment until after people became worried about
death.”
     “It’s plain that you must have been born and bred before the invention of nervous
prostration.”
      This weird dialogue held so little interest for Coldmoon and Beauchamp that my master had
no difficulty in retaining them as an audience for a further airing of his grievances against
civilization. “The key question,” he announced, “is how to avoid repaying borrowed money.”
      “But surely no such question can arise. Anything borrowed must always be repaid.”
      “All right, all right. Don’t get so up in the air. This is just a discussion between intelligent
men, so listen and don’t interrupt. I ask how can one borrow without repaying in order to lead in
to the parallel question as to how can one contrive to avoid dying. Though it is no longer much
pursued, that used to be the key question: hence the ancient concern with alchemy. However,
the alchemists achieved no real success and it soon became deadly clear that no human being
could ever dodge death.”
      “It was deadly clear long before the alchemists confirmed it.”
      “All right, but since this is just an argument, you just listen. Right?
      Now, once it became clear that everyone was bound to die, then the second question
arose.”
      “Indeed?”
      “If one is certain to die, what’s the best way to do so? That is the second question. Once
this second question had been formulated, it was only a matter of time before the Suicide Club
would be founded.”
      “I see.”
      “It is hard to die, but it is much harder if one cannot die. Victims of neurasthenia find living
far more painful than any death. Yet they remain obsessed with death; not because they shun
it, but because they fret to discover the best means to that much desired end. The majority will
lack the common sense to solve the problem. They will give up and leave nature to solve it for
them or society itself will bully them to death. But there will also be a handful of awkward
customers who will be unwilling to endure the slow death of such bullying. They will study the
options into death and their research will lead to marvelous new ideas.
      Beyond all doubt, the main characteristic of the future will be a steady rise in suicides and,
almost certainly, every self-destructor will be expected to work out his own original method of
escape.”
      “People will be put to a great deal of trouble.”
      “Yes, they most certainly will. Henry Arthur Jones has already written a play in which the
leading figure is a philosopher who strongly advocates suicide.”
      “Does he kill himself?”
      “Regrettably, no. But within a thousand years everyone will be doing it, and I am prepared
to bet that in ten thousand years time nobody will even think of death except in terms of
suicide.”
      “But that will be terrible.”
      “Indeed it will. By that time the study of suicide, on a foundation of years of detailed
research, will have been raised to the level of a highly respected and fully institutionalized
science. At middle schools such as the Hall of the Descending Clouds the study of suicide will
have replaced ethics as a compulsory subject.”
      “An intriguing prospect. A lecture course on the theory and practice of suicide might well be
worth attending. Hey, Waverhouse, have you been listening to Sneaze on the destiny of man?”
      “Yes I have. By the time of which he has just been speaking the ethics teacher at the Hall of
the Descending Clouds will be holding our current concepts of public morality up to reproof and
ridicule. The young men of that far world will be instructed to abandon the barbarous customs
of the ancients and to recognize that suicide is the first duty of every decent person. Moreover,
since it is eternally right to do unto others as one would wish done to oneself the moral
obligation to commit suicide implies an equally moral obligation to commit murder. Consider, the
teacher will say, the case of Mr. Peke Sneaze, that wretched, struggling scholar dragging out
his miserable existence just across from our school. Is he not obviously agonized by his
persistent breathing yet lacks the ordinary physical courage to fulfill his moral duty to do away
with himself? Is it not therefore, in common humanity, your compassionate duty to do him in?
Not, of course, in any of the ancient cowardly ways involving such crudities as spears, halberds
or any kind of firearm. In this day and age we are surely civilized beyond such coarse
atrocities. No, he should be harassed unto death. Only the most refined techniques of verbal
assassination should be employed. Which will be not only an act of charity toward that luckless
sufferer but a credit to yourselves and to the school.”
     “This extension lecture,Waverhouse upon Sneaze, is deeply interesting. I am truly moved by
the high-mindedness of our descendants.”
     “Yes, but there’s even more upon which to laud our unborn heirs. In our ill-governed times
the police are intended to safeguard the lives and property of citizens. But in the happier times
of our enlightened future, the police will carry cudgels, like dog-catchers, and go around
clubbing the citizens to death.”
     “Why that?”
     “Because today we value our lives and the police accordingly protect them. When in the
future, living is recognized for the agony it is, then the police will be required to club the
agonized to a merciful death. Of course, anyone in his right mind will already have committed
suicide; so the necessary objects of police attention will be only the gutless milk-sops, those
mentally impaired or deranged and any persons so pitifully disabled as to be unable to destroy
themselves. Additionally, anyone in need of help or assistance will, as today, just stick up a
notice to that effect on the gate to his house. The police will call around at some convenient
time and promptly supply to the man or woman concerned the assistance requested. The dead
bodies? Collected in hand drawn carts by the police on their regular rounds. The police
themselves? Recruited from criminals guilty of acts so hideous they’ve been condemned to life.
     And that’s not all. Consider this further interesting aspect of. . .”
     “But is there no end to this joke?” exclaims Beauchamp from the daze of his admiration.
Before an answer could be given, Singleman began to speak, very slowly and with great
deliberation, even though he still continued worrying away at his ridiculous tuft of beard.
     “You may call it a joke, but it might well, and better, be called a prediction. Those whose
minds are not unwaveringly concentrated upon the pursuit of ultimate truth are normally misled
by the mere appearances, however unreal, of the phenomenal world. They tend to accept what
they directly see and feel, not as some empty froth of illusion but as manifestations of an
eternal reality. Consequently, if someone says anything even slightly out of the ordinary, such
prisoners of their senses have no choice but to treat the communication as a joke.”
     “Do you mean,” says Coldmoon, deeply impressed, “something like that Chinese verse
about small birds being unable to understand the minds of greater birds?
    The swallow and the sparrow see no use
    In things that, to the eagle and the goose,
    Are plainly useful. It could even be
    That from their littleness the little see
    Nothing whatever of Immensity.”



      And he smirks with delight when Singleman, with an approving inclination of his head, says,
“Something like that.”
      Singleman, the even plodding of his speech unspurred even by adulation, slowly continues.
“Once, years ago, there was a place in Spain called Cordoba. . .”
      “Once? It’s still there, isn’t it?”
      “That may be. The question of time past or present is immaterial. In any event, in Cordoba
it used to be the custom that at the time of the angelus, the evening striking of the bells of
churches, all the women came out of their houses and bathed in the river. . .”
      “Even in winter?”
      “I’m not sure about that, but in any case, every female in the place—young or old—jumped
into the river, and no man was allowed to join them. The men simply looked on from a distance,
and all they could see in the evening twilight were the women’s whitish forms dimly moving
above the rippling waters.”
      “That’s poetic. It could be made into a new-style poem. What did you say the place was
called?” Beauchamp always shows interest whenever female nudity is mentioned.
      “Cordoba. Now, the young men thought it a pity that they could neither swim with the
women nor study their form in a better light. So, one fine day, they played a little trick. . .”
      “Oh really? Tell me more,” says Waverhouse immediately. The mention of any kind of trick
has, upon him, the same invigorating effect as nudity works upon Beauchamp.
      “They bribed the bell-ringer to sound the angelus one hour early. The women, being such
sillies, all trooped down to the riverbank as soon as they heard the bells, and there, one after
another in their various states of undress, they jumped off into the water. And then, too late,
they at last realized that it was still broad day.”
      “Are you sure that there wasn’t a fierce autumn sun ablaze?”
      “A great number of men were standing watching from the bridge.
      The women didn’t know what to do and felt terribly ashamed.”
      “And then?”
      “The moral is simply this: that one should always be wary of the common human failing of
allowing oneself to be blinded by habit to basic realities.”
      “Not a bad little sermon. A tale worth remembering. But let me give you another example,
from a magazine story which I recently read, of someone rendered blind by an accustomed
habit. Imagine that I’ve opened an antique shop and that, up at the front, I’ve put on display
some particularly excellent scrolls and works of art. No fakes, nothing shabby, only genuine,
first-class stuff. Naturally the prices are very high.
      In due course along comes some art fancier who stops and enquires about the price of a
certain scroll. I point out that the scroll is by Motonobu, that son of Masanobu who founded the
Kano school in the early sixteenth century, and I then quote some quite astronomical sum, say,
six thousand. The customer replies that he likes the scroll very much but, at such a price, and
not carrying such large sums of money on his person, he’ll have to let it go.”
     “How can you possibly know,” asks my master, ever the wet blanket, “that the customer
will answer like that?”
     “Don’t worry, he will. And anyway it’s only a story, so I can make my customer answer as I
like. So I then say to him, ‘Please, for those of us who appreciate Motonobu, payment is hardly
the point. If you like it, take it with you.’The customer can hardly do that. So he hesitates. I
proceed in my friendliest manner to say that, confident that I shall be enjoying his future
patronage, I would be happy to settle any difficulties about payment by accepting small sums
paid monthly over a long period. ‘Please don’t feel under any obligation. But how about a
hundred a month? Or shall we say fifty?’ Finally, after a few more questions and answers, I end
up selling him the Motonobu scroll for six thousand paid in monthly installments of only a
hundred.”
     “Sounds like that scheme in 1898 for buying the ninth edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica
Through the Times.”
     “The Times is reliable, an honest sort of broker, but my scheme is of a very different
character. As, if you listen carefully, you’ll see. Now, Coldmoon, suppose you pay a hundred a
month for my Motonobu, how long will you be paying installments?”
     “For five years? Of course, isn’t it?”
     “Five years, of course. Now, Singleman, do you think five years is a long time or a short
time?”
     Singleman raised his head into its best position for the drone of Zen wisdom and intoned:



    “A single minute may be felt to be
    As sempeternal as eternity,
    While ten millenia can at times go by
    In the mere flicker of an adder’s eye.



    “By which I mean your five years could be either long or short or simultaneously both.”
    “You’re at it again, Singleman. Is there some deep moral message in that quotation? A
sense of morals totally detached from common sense, eh? Anyway, a hundred a month for five
years involves sixty separate payments, and therein lies the danger of habit. If one repeats the
same action sixty times over, month after month, one is likely to become so habituated to
payment that one also coughs up on the sixty-first occasion. And on the sixty-second. And on
the sixty-third and so on because the breaking of an established habit irks the habitue. Men are
supposed to be clever, but they all have the same weakness: they follow established patterns
without questioning the reason for their establishment. My scheme simply exploits that
weakness to earn me a hundred a month until my customer finally drops dead.”
    “Though I like your joke,” tittered Coldmoon, “I doubt if you’ll find a great many customers
so profitably forgetful.”
    My master, however, did not seem to find the story funny. In a serious voice he said, “That
sort of thing does actually happen. I used to pay back my university loan, month after month on
a regular basis, and I kept no count of the number of payments. In the end I only stopped
because the university told me to stop.” My master seems almost to brag of his half-wittedness
as though it were the benchmark of humanity.
     “There you are,” cries Waverhouse. “You see, the reality of my imagined customer is sitting
right here in front of us. Yet that very same person, a self-confessed slave to human habit, has
the effrontery to laugh at my projection of his own vision of our future civilization into its likely
and unlaughable reality. Inexperienced young fellows like Beauchamp and Coldmoon, if they are
not to be defrauded of their human rights, should listen very carefully for the wisdom in our
words.”
     “I hear and shall obey. Never, never shall I commit myself to any installment plan that
involves more than sixty repayments.”
     “I know you still think it’s all just a joke but I do assure you, Coldmoon, that it was a truly
instructive story,” said Singleman turning directly to face him. “For instance, suppose that
someone as wise and experienced as either Sneaze or Waverhouse told you that you had
acted improperly in going off and getting married without advising any of the interested parties
of your intentions? Should they advise that you ought to go and apologize to that Goldfield
person, what would you do? Would you go and make your apologies?”
     “I should beg to be excused. I would not demur if they wished to go and offer an
explanation of my behavior. But to go myself, no.”
     “What if the police ordered you to apologize?”
     “I should refuse all the more strongly.”
     “If a minister of the government or a peer of the realm asked you to apologize?”
     “Then, yet more firmly still, I would refuse.”
     “There, you see how times have changed. Not so long ago the power of those in authority
was unlimited. Then came a time when there were certain things which even they could not
demand. But nowadays there are strict limits upon the power of peers and even ministers to
compel the individual. To put the matter bluntly, we are witnessing a period when, the greater
the power of the authorities, the greater the resistance they’ll encounter. Our fathers would be
astonished to see how things which the authorities clearly want done, and have ordered should
be done, nevertheless remain undone. This era takes for granted any number of things which
elderly people would once have thought unthinkable. It is quiet extraordinary how quickly and
how totally both men and their concept of society can change. So, though you may of course
laugh as much as you like at Waverhouse’s version of the future, you would be wise not to
laugh so hard that you fail to consider how much of it might prove true.”
     “Flattered as I am to have found so appreciative a friend, I feel that much more obliged to
continue with my forecast of the future. First I would emphasize, as Singleman has already
indicated, that anyone nowadays who proudly thinks himself powerful by reason of delegated
authority, or who seeks to maintain an outdated power by marching around with a troop of a
hundred henchmen brandishing bamboo spears, can only be compared to that antiquated bigot
who imagined that his spanking palanquin could travel faster than a railway train. I fancy that
the best local example of such a fathead might actually be that usurer Goldfield, whom I
consider the master fathead of them all. So perhaps we should simply relax and leave time to
slide over him.
     Anyway, my forecast of the future is not so much concerned with such minor transitional
matters as with a particular social phenomenon that will determine the long-term destiny of the
entire human race. My friends, if you will take a long-term view of the trends already obvious in
the development of our civilization, you will have no choice but to share my view that marriage
has had it. Are you surprised? That the sacred institution of marriage should be so summarily
written off? Well, the grounds for my forecast have already been stated and, I think, accepted:
that modern society is centered, to the exclusion of all else, upon the idea of individuality. When
the family was represented by its head, the district by its magistrate and the province by its
feudal lord, then those who were not representatives possessed no personalities whatsoever.
Even if exceptionally, they actually did have personalities, those characteristics, being
inappropriate to their place in society, were never recognized as such. Suddenly everything
changed. We were all discovered to possess personalities, and every individual began to assert
his newfound individuality. Whenever two persons chanced to meet, their attitudes betrayed a
disposition to quarrel, an underlying determination to insist that ‘I am I, and you are you,’ and
that no human being was any more human than any other. Obviously, each individual grew a
little stronger by reason of this new individuality. But, of course, precisely because everyone
had grown stronger, everyone had also grown proportionately weaker than their fellow-
individuals. Because it’s now harder for people to oppress you, certainly you’re stronger; but
because it’s now a lot more difficult for you to meddle in other folk’s affairs, you’re clearly that
much weaker. Everyone, naturally, likes to be strong, and no one, naturally, likes to be weak.
Consequently, we all vigorously defend the strong points in our position in society, scrapping
like fiends over the merest trifles, and at the same time, in an unremitting effort to undermine
the position of our fellows, we lever away at their weakest points at every opportunity. It
follows that men have no genuine living space left between them which is not occupied by siege
engines and counterworks. Too cramped to live at ease, the constant pressure to expand one’s
individual sphere has brought mankind to a painful bursting point and, having arrived by their
own machinations at such an unpleasant state of affairs, men thereupon devised a means to
relieve the unbearable pressure: they developed that system under which parents and their
married offspring live separately. In the more backward parts of Japan, among the wilder
mountains, you can still find entire families, including their lesser cousinage, all living together,
perfectly contentedly, in one single house. That lifestyle was only viable because, apart from
the head of the family, no member of the group possessed any individuality to assert; while any
member who, exceptionally, happened to possess it, took good care never to let it show.
However, in more up-to-date and civilized communities the individual members of families are
struggling amongst themselves, no less fiercely than do other and totally unrelated members of
modern society, both to guard their own positions and to undermine those of their so-called
nearest and dearest.
      There is, therefore, little real choice but to live separately.
      “In Europe, where the modernization of society has proceeded much further than has yet
happened in Japan, this necessary disintegration of the multi-generation family unit has long
been common. If by chance European parents and sons do live in the same house, the sons
pay, as they would elsewhere, for board and lodging. Similarly, if sons borrow money from their
father, they pay it back with interest as they would if they had borrowed from a bank. This sort
of laudable arrangement is only possible when fathers recognize and pay proper respect to
sons’
      individualities. Sooner or later such customs must be adopted in Japan.
      It is many years now since uncles, aunts, and cousins moved out of the family unit to
establish their separate lives: the time is now coming for fathers and sons to separate, but the
development of individuality and of a feeling of respect toward individuality will go on growing
endlessly.
     We shall never be at peace unless we move farther apart and give each other room for that
growth. But when parents, sons, brothers, and sisters have all so eased apart, what further
easement can be sought? Only the separation of husband and wife. Some people today still
persist in the mistaken view that a husband and wife are a husband and wife because they live
together. The point is that they can only live together if their separate individualities are
sufficiently harmonious. No question of disharmony arose in the old days because, being in the
Confucian phrase ‘two bodies but one spirit,’ husband-and-wife was a single person. Even after
death they remained inseparable, haunting the world as two badgers from a single sett. That
barbarous state of affairs is now all changed. A husband now is simply a man who happens to
be married, a wife a woman in the same lamentable condition. This wife person went to a girls’
school from which, after an excellent education designed to strengthen her individuality, she
comes marching out in a Western hairstyle to be a bride. No wonder the man she marries
cannot make her do what he likes. If such a woman did, in fact, accommodate herself to her
husband’s beck and call, people would say she’s not a wife but a doll. The harder she works to
become an intelligent helpmate, the greater the space demanded by her individuality and the
less her husband can abide her. Quarreling begins. The brighter the wife, the more bitter and
incessant are the quarrels, and there’s no sense in boasting of intelligence in a wife if all it
produces is misery for both of you. Now within this marriage a boundary is established, a
boundary as distinct as that between oil and water. Even that would not be too awful if only it
were steady, but in practice the line of marital friction bounces up and down so that the whole
domestic scene is in a constant condition of earthquake. By such experiences the human race
has come to accept that it is unprofitable to both parties that married couples should live
together.”
     “So what do they do?” asks Coldmoon. “Divorce on the scale you imply is a worrying
prospect.”
     “Yes, they part. What else can they do? It’s clear to me that, eventually, all married couples
will get divorced. As things still stand, those who live together are husband and wife, but in the
future those who live together will be generally considered to have disqualified themselves from
being a normal married couple.”
     “I suppose that a man like myself will be one of the disqualified. . .”
     Coldmoon misses no chance to remind us of his recent marriage.
     “You are lucky to have been born in the days of the Emperor Meiji when traditional ways
are still observed. Being a gifted prophet of things to come, I am inevitably two or three stops
ahead of my contemporaries in all matters of any importance; that, of course, is why I am
already a bachelor. I know there are people who go around saying that I remain unmarried
because of some early disappointment in love, but one can only pity such persons for their
shallow minds and their inability to see further than the ends of their snooping noses.”
Waverhouse paused for breath. “But to return to my farsighted vision of the future. . . A
philosopher will descend from heaven. He will preach the unprecedented truth that all members
of mankind, both men and women, are essentially individuals. Impairment of their individuality
can only lead to the destruction of the human race. The purpose of human life is to maintain and
develop individuality, and, to attain that end, no sacrifice is too great. It is thus contrary to the
nature and needs of mankind that the ancient, evil, barbarous practice of marriage should
continue. Such primitive rites were, perhaps, understandable before the sacrosanctity of
individuality was recognized, but to allow the continuation of these dreadful customs into our
own civilized era is quite unthinkable. The deplorable habit of marriage must be broken. In our
developed culture there is no reason whatsoever why two individuals should be bound to each
other in the highly abnormal intimacy of the traditional marriage relationship.
     Once the revelations of the heaven sent philosopher have been clearly understood, it will be
regarded as extremely immoral of young uneducated men and women to allow themselves to
be so carried away by base and fleeting passions that they even stoop to low indulgence in
wedding ceremonies. Even today we must do our best to get such tribal customs discontinued.”
     “Sir,” said Beauchamp so very firmly that he even slapped his kneecap,
     “I totally reject your vile prognostication. In my opinion, nothing in this world is more
precious than love and beauty. It is entirely thanks to these two things that we can be consoled,
be made perfect, and be happy. Again, it is entirely due to them that our feelings can be
gracefully expressed, our characters made noble, and our sympathies refined.
     Therefore, no matter where or when one is born, here or in Timbuktu, now or in the future,
love and beauty remain the eternal guidestars of mankind. When they manifest themselves in
the actual world, love is seen in the relationship between husband and wife, while beauty shines
forth either as poetry or music. These are the expressions, at its highest level, of the very
humanity of the human race; I do not believe, so long as our kind exists upon the surface of this
planet, that either the arts or our current ideal of the married couple will perish therefrom.”
     “It would be well, perhaps, if it were so. But, for the reasons which the heaven sent
philosopher has just given for his forecast, both love and beauty are bound to perish. You will
just have to accept the inevitable.
     You spoke of the imperishable glories of art, but they will go the same way as the married
couple: into oblivion. The irreversible development of individuality will bring ever greater
demands by individuals for recognition of their singular identity. In a world where I and you both
insist that ‘I am I, and you are you,’ how can any art perdure? Surely the arts now flourish by
reason of a harmony between the individualities of the artist and of each appreciative member
of his public. That harmony is already being crushed to death. You may protest until the cows
come home that you are a new-style poet, but if no one shares your conviction of the worth of
your poems, I’m afraid you’ll never be read. However many epithalamia you compose, your
work will be dying as you write it.
     It is thus especially gratifying that, writing as you do in Meiji times, the whole world may still
rejoice in its excellence.”
     “I’m not all that well-known.”
     “If already today your splendid efforts are not all that well-known, what do you imagine will
be their fate in the future when civilization has advanced yet further and that heaven sent
philosopher has knocked the stuffing out of marriage? No one at all will read your poems. Not
because the poems are yours and you are a bad poet, but because individuality has intensified
to such an extent that anything written by other people holds no interest for anyone. This stage
of the literary future is already evidenced in England where two of their leading novelists, Henry
James and George Meredith, have personalities so strong and so strongly reflected in their
novels that very few people care to read them.
     And no wonder. Only readers with personalities of matching force could find such works of
any interest. That trend will accelerate and, by the time that marriage is finally recognized as
immoral, all art will have disappeared. Surely you can see that, when anything that either of us
might write has become quite meaningless to the other, then there will be nothing, let alone art,
which we can share. We shall all be excommunicated from each other.”
     “I suppose you’re right; but somehow, intuitively, I cannot believe the fearful picture you
have painted.”
     “If you can’t grasp it intuitively, then try it discursively.”
     “Discursive or intuitive,” Singleman blurts out, “what’s it matter? The point is that it’s true.
It’s quite obvious that the greater the freedom of the individuality permitted to human beings,
the less free their interrelations must become. I consider that all Nietzsche’s glorification of a
Superman is nothing but a philosophical attempt to talk a way out of the dead-end facing
mankind. You might at first sight think that Nietzsche was enunciating some cherished ideal, but
on reflection you’ll recognize that he’s simply voicing his bitter discontent. Twisting about in his
bed, niggled by his neighbors, worried by their developing individualities, Nietzsche funked even
the nineteenth century. Pouring out such jeremiads, he must have lived in an agony of despair.
Reading his works, one does not feel inspired, merely sorry for their wretched author. That
voice of his is not the voice of intrepidity and determination; it is nothing more than the whine of
grievance and the screams of indignation. It was, perhaps, an understandable reaction in a
rejected philosopher.
     When in ancient times a truly great man appeared, all the whole world flocked to gather
under his banner. Which was no doubt very gratifying, certainly sufficiently gratifying for the
great man in question to feel no need to resort to pen and paper with all that virulence one finds
in Nietzsche. The superhuman characters portrayed in Homer’s epics and in the Ballad of
Chevy Chase are not demon-driven. Unlike Nietzsche’s Superman, they are alive with life, with
gaiety and just plain fun. Their times were truly merry and the merriment is recreated in the
writing.
     Naturally, in days like that there was no trace of Nietzsche’s atrabilious venom. But in
Nietzsche’s period things were sadly different. No hero shone on his horizons and, even if a
hero had appeared, no one would have honored, respected, or even noticed him. When, in a
much earlier period, Confucius made his appearance, it was relatively easy for him to assert his
importance because he had no equals as competitors. Today they’re ten a penny and possibly
the whole wide world is packed with them. Certainly no one nowadays would be impressed if
you claimed to be a new Confucius, and you, because you had failed to impress, would
become waspish in your discontent, in precisely the sort of discontent which leads to books
which brandish Superman about our ears. We sought freedom and now we suffer from the
inconveniences that freedom can but bring. Does it not follow that, though Western civilization
seems splendid at first glance, at the end of the day it proves itself a bane? In sharp contrast,
we in the East have always, since long, long, long ago, devoted ourselves not to material
progress but to development of the mind. That Way was the right way. Now that the pressures
of individuality are bringing on all sorts of nervous disorders, we are at last able to grasp the
meaning of the ancient tag that ‘people are carefree under firm rule.’ And it won’t be long before
Lao Tzu’s doctrine of the activating effect of inactivity grows to seem less of a paradox. By
then, of course, it will be too late to do anything more than recognize our likeness to addicted
alcoholics who wish they’d never touched the stuff.”
     “All you fellows,” said Coldmoon, “seem hideously pessimistic about the future, but none of
your moans and groans depress me in the least.
     I wonder why.”
     “That’s because you’ve just got married,” said Waverhouse hastening to explain away the
mildest manifestation of hope.
     Then, suddenly, my master began to talk. “If my dear Coldmoon, you’re thinking yourself
fortunate to have found a wife, you’re making a big mistake. For your particular information, I
shall now read out something of pertinent interest.” Opening that antique of a book which he’d
brought from his study a short time back, my master then continued. “As you can see, this is an
old book but it was perfectly clear, even in those early days, that women were terrible.”
     “Sir, you surprise me. But may I ask when the book was written?” said Coldmoon.
     “In the sixteenth century, by a man called Thomas Nashe.”
     “I’m even more surprised. You mean to say that even in those early days someone spoke ill
of my wife?”
     “The book contains a wide variety of complaints about women, some of which will certainly
apply to your wife. So you’d better listen carefully.”
     “All right. I am listening.Very honored, too.”
     “The book begins by saying that all men must heed the views of womanhood propounded
down the ages by recognized sages. You follow me?
     Are you listening?”
     “We are all listening. Even I, a bachelor, am listening.”
     “Aristotle says that, since all women are good-for-nothings anyway, it is best, if you must
get married, to choose a small bride, because a small good-for-nothing is less disastrous than
a large one.”
     “Coldmoon, is this wife of yours hefty or petite?”
     “She’s one of the heftier good-for-nothings.”
     They all laughed, more at the suddenness with which Coldmoon had rejoined the eternal
conspiracy of males than at anything inherently funny in his answer.
     “Well,” said Waverhouse, “that’s an interesting book, I must say. Read us some more.”
     “A man once asked what might be a miracle, and the sage replied, ‘A chaste woman.’”
     “Who, sir, is this sage?”
     “The book doesn’t give his name.”
     “I’ll bet he was a sage who had been jilted.”
     “Next comes Diogenes who, when asked at what age it was best to take a wife,
replied,‘For a young man, not yet; for the old man, never.’”
     “No doubt that miserable fellow thought that up in his barrel,” observed Waverhouse.
     “Pythagoras says that there are three evils not to be suffered: fire, water, and a woman.”
     “I didn’t know,” said Singleman, “that any Greek philosopher was responsible for such an ill-
considered apothegm. If you ask me, none of them are evil: one can enter fire and not be burnt,
enter water and not be drowned, enter. . .” Here he got stuck until Waverhouse helped him out
by adding, “And entertain a woman without being bewitched, eh?”
     Paying no regard to his friends interjections, my master went on with his reading. “Socrates
says that a man’s most difficult task is to try to control women and children. Demosthenes says
that the greatest torment a man can invent for his enemy’s vexation is to give him his own
daughter in marriage ‘as a domestical Furie to disquiet him night and day’ until he dies of it. The
eminent Seneca says that there be two especial troubles in this world: a wife and ignorance.
The Emperor Marcus Aurelius compares women to ships because ‘to keep them well in order,
there is always somewhat wanting.’ Plautus claims that women ‘deck themselves so gorgeously
and lace themselves so nicely’ because, and I paraphrase, such a mean trick disguises their
natural ugliness. Valerius Maximus in a letter to one of his friends advises him that almost
nothing is impossible for a woman, and goes on to entreat God Almighty that ‘his sweet friend
be not entrapped by woman’s treacherie.’ It was this same Valerius Maximus who answered his
own question about the nature of woman by saying,‘She is an enemy to friendship, an inevitable
pain, a necessary evil, a natural temptation, a desired calamity, a honey-seeming poison.’ He
also remarked that, if it is a sin to put a woman away, it is surely a much greater torment to
keep her still.”
     “Please, sir,” pleaded Coldmoon, “that’s enough. I cannot bear to hear any more awful
things about my wife.”
     “There are still several more pages. How about listening to the end?”
     “Oh, have a heart,” said Waverhouse, “and anyway isn’t it about time for your own good
lady to come home?” He had hardly started his usual style of teasing when from the direction of
the other room there came the sound of Mrs. Sneaze calling sharply for the maid.
     “I say, that’s torn it,” Waverhouse whispered. “Had you realized she was back?”
     My master permitted himself a spasm of muffled laughter. “What’s it matter if she is?”
     But Waverhouse was not to be dissuaded. “Oh, Mrs. Sneaze,” he called, “how long have
you been home?”
     Answer, as the poets put it, came there none.
     “Did you happen to hear what your noble spouse was just telling us, Mrs. Sneaze?”
     Still no answer.
     “I hope you understand he wasn’t speaking his own thoughts. Just reading out the opinions
of a Mr. Nashe from the sixteenth century.
     Nothing personal. Please don’t take it to heart.”
     “It hardly matters to me,” came the curt response in a voice so faint and distant that Mrs.
Sneaze might well have been away in the sixteenth century pursuing the issue with Mr. Nashe
himself. Coldmoon giggled nervously.
     “Well, of course it hardly matters to me, either. I’m sorry to have mentioned it.”
Waverhouse was now laughing out loud when we heard the sound of the outside gate being
opened and heavy footsteps entering the house. Next moment, and with no further
announcement, the sliding door of the room was yanked aside and the face of Tatara Sampei
peered in through the gap.
     Sampei hardly looked himself. His snow-white shirt and his spanking new frock-coat were
surprises in themselves but he was also carrying, their necks string-tied together, a clutch of
bottles of beer. He set the bottles down beside the dried bonitos, and himself, without even a
nod of greeting, hunkered down heavily on his hams with all the self-confident resolution of a
warrior. “Mr. Sneaze, sir,” he immediately began, “has your stomach trouble gotten any better
lately? It’s all this staying at home, you know; it does you no good.”
     “I haven’t said whether my stomach was better or worse,” my master tartly objected.
     “No, I know you haven’t. But your complexion speaks for itself. It’s not good, yellow like
that. This is the right time of year to go fishing.
     Why not hire a boat at Shinagawa? Bracing. I went out last Sunday.”
     “Did you catch anything?”
     “No, nothing.”
     “Is it any fun when you don’t catch a sausage?”
     “The idea is to buck yourself up, to get the old juices flowing again.
     How about all of you? Have you ever been out fishing? It’s terrific fun.
     You see,” he began speaking to them as a group, somewhat loftily as though to a ring of
children, “you set off in this tiny boat across the vast blue ocean. . .”
     “My preference,” said the irrepressible Waverhouse, “would be to set off in a vast blue boat
across the smallest possible ocean.”
     “I can see no point,” said Coldmoon in his most detached voice, “no fun at all in setting off
on a fishing expedition unless one expects to catch at least a whale. Or a mermaid.”
     “You can’t catch whales from cockleshells and mermaids don’t exist.
     You scribbling men of letters have no common sense whatever.”
     “I’m not a man of letters.”
     “No? Then what the devil are you? I’m a businessman, and for us businessmen the one
thing you must have is common sense.” He turned toward my master and addressed him
directly. “You know, sir, over the last few months I have amassed a very great stock of
common sense. Of course, working as I do in a great business center, it’s only natural that I
should become like this.”
     “Like what?”
     “Take, for instance, cigarettes. One can’t expect to get very far in business if one goes
around smoking trashy brands like Shiki-shima or Asahi.” At this point, he produced a pack of
Egyptian cigarettes, selected a gold-tipped tube, lit it ostentatiously and began to puff its
scented smoke.
     “Can you really afford to chuck your money around like that? You must be rolling in the
stuff.”
     “No. No money yet, but something will turn up. Smoking these cigarettes builds one’s
image, confers considerable prestige.”
     “It’s certainly an easier way to gain prestige than by polishing glass balls. A real short cut to
fame. Far less troublesome than all your labors, wouldn’t you say, Coldmoon?”
     Waverhouse had scarcely closed his mouth, and before Coldmoon could utter a syllable,
Sampei turned and said, “So, you are Mr.
     Coldmoon. The chap who’s given up on his doctorate. For which reason it’s become me.”
     “You’re studying for a degree?”
     “No, I’m marrying Miss Goldfield. To tell the truth, I felt rather sorry for you, missing a
chance like that, but they pressed me so hard that I’ve agreed to marry her. Nevertheless, I
can’t help feeling that somehow I’ve wronged Mr. Coldmoon. Can you follow my feelings, Mr.
Sneaze?”
     “But please, my dear sir,” said Coldmoon, “you are most welcome to the match.”
     “If she’s what you want,” my master mumbled vaguely, “then I suppose you might as well
marry her.”
     “How absolutely splendid,” burbles Waverhouse. “All’s well that ends well, and all that. It
just goes to show that nobody need ever worry about getting his daughters married. Wasn’t I
saying only just now that someone suitable would quickly come along and, sure enough, she’s
already found this very cool customer to be her unblushing bridegroom.
     Think of it, Beauchamp, and rejoice. It’s a gift of a theme for one of your new-style poems.
Waste no time. Get going.” Waverhouse was off again.
     “And are you,” asked Sampei somewhat obsequiously, “the poet Mr.
     Beauchamp? I should be deeply grateful if you would deign to compose something for our
wedding. I could have it printed right away and have it sent out to all concerned. I will also
arrange for it to be printed in the daily press.”
     “I’d be happy to oblige. When would you like to have it?”
     “Any time. And any piece which you already have on hand would do.
     And for that I’ll invite you to our wedding reception. We’ll be having champagne. Have you
ever tried it? It tastes delicious. I’m planning, Mr.
     Sneaze, to hire an orchestra, a small one, for the occasion. Perhaps we could get Mr.
Beauchamp’s poem set to music and then it could be played while the guests are eating. How
about that, Mr. Sneaze? What do you think?”
     “You do as you like.”
     “But Mr. Sneaze, could you write the musical setting for me?”
     “Don’t be silly.”
     “Isn’t there anyone among you who could handle the music?”
     “Mr. Coldmoon, the unsuccessful marriage candidate and failed ball polisher, happens also
to be a fine violinist. Ask him if he’ll oblige. But I doubt if he’ll squander his wealth of soul in
return for a mere sipping of champagne.”
     “But there are champagnes and champagnes. I shan’t be offering anything cheap or nasty.
No filthy pops. Nothing but the best.
     Won’t you help me out?”
     “Of course, and with pleasure. I’ll write the music even if your champagne is mere cider.
Indeed, if you like, I’ll do the job for nothing.”
     “I wouldn’t dream of asking you to aid me unrewarded.
     If you don’t enjoy champagne, how about this for payment?” Reaching into his jacket
pocket, Sampei pulled out some seven or eight photographs and scattered them on the floor-
matting. One was half-length, one was full-length, one standing, another sitting, one dressed
somewhat casually, another very correctly in a long-sleeved kimono and yet another wearing a
formal Japanese hairdo. All of them were photographs of young girls.
     “Mr. Sneaze, sir, these were all prospective brides in whom I am, of course, no longer
interested. But if any of these marriage candidates happened to interest Mr. Coldmoon or Mr.
Beauchamp, I would gladly, in recognition of their assistance to myself act as their agent in
effecting introductions to any of these fanciable ladies. How about this one here?” he asks,
thrusting a photograph under Coldmoon’s nose.
     “Oh nice,” says Coldmoon, “very nice. I rather fancy that one.”
     “And how about this?” He shoves another picture into Coldmoon’s hand.
     “Very nice, too. Quite charming. Yes, I certainly fancy her.”
     “But which one do you want?”
     “I don’t mind which.”
     “You seem a bit feckless,” Sampei commented dryly. Then, turning to my master, he went
on with his sales pitch. “This one, actually, is the niece of a doctor.”
     “I see.”
     “This next one is extremely good-natured. Young, too. Only seventeen. . . And this one
carries a whacking great dowry. . . While this one here is a daughter of a provincial governor.”
All alone with his imaginings, Sampei rattles on.
     “Do you think I could marry them all?”
     “All? That’s plain gluttonous. Are you some kind of polygamist or something?”
     “No, not a polygamist. But a carnivore, of course.”
     “Never mind what you are. Sampei, put those snaps away at once.
     Can’t you see,” said my master in a tone of sharp scolding, “that he’s only leading you on?”
     “So you don’t want an introduction to any of them,” said Sampei, half in question and half in
statement, as, one by one, slowly, giving Beauchamp and Coldmoon a last chance to relent, he
put the pictures back into his pocket.
     There was no response.
     “Well now, what are those bottles for?”
     “A present. I bought them just now at the dramshop on the corner so that we might drink to
my forthcoming marriage. Come, let’s start.”
     My master clapped his hands for the maid and asked her to open the bottles. Then the five
of them, my master, Waverhouse, Singleman, Coldmoon, and Beauchamp, solemnly lifting their
glasses, congratulated Sampei on his good fortune in love. Sampei fairly glowed with self-
esteem and assured them, “I shall invite you all to the ceremony. Can all of you come? I do
hope so.”
     “No,” my master answered promptly. “I shan’t.”
     “Why ever not? It’ll be the grandest once-in-a-lifetime day of my life.
     And you won’t attend it? Seems a bit heartless.”
     “I’m not heartless. But I won’t attend.”
     “Ah, you haven’t got the things to wear? Is that the snag?
     I can gladly arrange for the right kit to be made available. You really ought to go out more
and meet people. I’ll introduce you to some well-known persons.”
     “That’s the very last thing I would wish.”
     “It might even cure your stomach troubles.”
     “I don’t care if they never get better.”
     “Well, if you can’t be budged, you can’t. But how about you others?
     Will you be able to come?”
     “Me? I’d love to,” said Waverhouse. “I would even be delighted to play the role of the
honored go-between. A verse leaps to my lips:



    Evening in spring:
    The marriage rite
    And nuptial bonds made champagne-tight.



     “What’s that you said? Suzuki’s going to be the go-between? I might have known it. Well, in
that case, I’m sorry, but there it is. I suppose that it really would be a bit too much to have two
lots of go-betweens. So I’ll attend your party as an ordinary human being.”
     “And how about you? Will you come with your friends?”
     “Me?” said Singleman apparently surprised.



    “Having this fishing rod to be my friend,
    I live at ease in nature and am free
    Of every care the red-dust world might send
    Like some hooked promise to entangle me.”



     “And what the hell is that?” asked Waverhouse. “Something from the hallowed guide on
how to write a poem in Chinese?”
     “I really can’t remember where I picked it up.”
     “You really can’t remember? How tiresome for you. Well, come if your fishing rod can spare
you. And you, Mr. Coldmoon, I hope I may count on you. After all, you have a special status in
this matter.”
     “Most certainly I’ll be there. It would be a pity to miss the chance of hearing my own music
played by an orchestra.”
     “Of course. And what about you, Mr. Beauchamp?”
     “Well, yes. I’d like to be there to read my new-style poem in front of the couple
themselves.”
     “That’s wonderful. Mr. Sneaze, sir, I’ve never before in all my life felt so pleased with the
world. And, to mark the moment, I’ll have another glass of that beer.” He filled a tumbler to the
brim and sank it at one go.
     Slowly his face turned shining red.
     The short autumn day has grown dark. The charcoal fire in the brazier has long ago burnt
out and its crust of ash is studded and strewn with an ugly mess of cigarette ends. Even these
happy-go-lucky men seem to have had enough of their merriment and in the end it was
Singleman who, climbing stiffly to his feet, remarked, “It’s getting late.
     Time to be on our way.” The others followed suit and, politely apopemptic, vanished into the
night. The drawing room grew desolate, like a variety hall when the show is over.
     My master ate his dinner and went off into his study. His wife, feeling the autumn chill,
tightens her collar, settles over her sewing box, and gets on with her remodeling of a worn-out
kimono. The children, lying in one row, are fast asleep. The maid has gone out to a bathhouse.
     If one tapped the deep bottom of the hearts of these seemingly lighthearted people, it
would give a somewhat sad sound. Though Singleman behaves as though enlightenment had
made him a familiar of the skies, his feet still shuffle, earthbound, through this world. The world
of Waverhouse, though it may be easy-going, is not the dreamworld of those painted
landscapes which he loves. That winsome donzel Coldmoon, having at last stopped polishing
his little globes of glass, has fetched from his far home province a bride to cheer his days.
Which is pleasant and quite normal, but the sad fact is that long-continued, pleasant normality
becomes a bore. Beauchamp too, however golden-hearted he is now, will have come in ten
years’ time to realize the folly of giving away for nothing those new-style poems that are the
essence of his heart. As for Sampei, I find it difficult to judge whether he’ll finish up on top of
the pile or down the drain, but I’d like to think he’ll manage to live his life out proud and happy in
the ability to souse his acquaintance in champagne. Suzuki will remain the same eternal
groveling creeper. Grovelers get covered in mud, but, even so be-sharned, he’ll manage better
than those who cannot creep at all.
     As for me, I am a cat, still nameless though born two years ago, who has lived his life
among men. I have always thought myself unique in my knowledge of mankind, but I was
recently much surprised to meet another cat, some German mog called Kater Murr, who
suddenly turned up and started sounding off in a very high-falutin’ manner on my own special
subject. I subsequently made enquiries and discovered that my visitor was in fact the ghost of a
cat who, though he’d been in Hell since dying a century ago, had become so piqued with
curiosity about my reputation that he rematerialized for the express purpose of upsetting me.
This cat, I learned, was a most unfilial creature. On one occasion when he was going to meet
his mother, he was carrying a fish in his mouth to give her as a present. However he failed to
control his animal appetites and broke his journey to guzzle the fish. His combination of talents
and greed was such as to make him virtually human, and he even once astonished his master
by writing a poem. If such a feline culture-hero was already demonstrating superior cat skills so
long as a century ago, perhaps a good-for-nothing specimen like me has already outlived its
purpose and should no more delay its retirement into nothingness.
     My master, sooner or later, will die of his dyspepsia. Old man Goldfield is already doomed
by his greed. The autumn leaves have mostly fallen. All that has life must lose it. Since there
seems so little point in living, perhaps those who die young are the only creatures wise. If one
heeds the sages who assembled here today, mankind has already sentenced itself to extinction
by suicide. If we don’t watch out, even cats may find their individualities developing along the
lethal crushing pattern forecast for these two-legged loons. It’s an appalling prospect.
     Depression weighs upon me. Perhaps a sip of Sampei’s beer would cheer me up.
     I go around to the kitchen. The backdoor is half-open and rattles in the autumn wind. Which
seems to have blown the lamp out, for the room’s unlit. Still, there are shadows tilting inward
through the window.
     Moonrise, I suppose. On a tray there are three glasses, two of them half-filled with a
brownish liquid. Even warm water, if kept in a glass, looks cold. Naturally this liquid, standing
quietly beside the jar of charcoal existinguisher, looks, in the icy moonlight, chill and uninviting.
     However, anything for experience. If Sampei, as I recall, could after drinking it become a
bright, warm red and start breathing as heavily as a man who’s run a mile, perhaps it’s not
impossible for a cat that drinks it to feel livelier. Anyway, some day I, too, must die so l might
as well try everything before I do. Once I’m dead, I tell myself, it will be too late in the grave to
regret that I never tasted beer. So, take courage and drink up!
     I flicked my tongue into the stuff but, as I began to lap, I got a sharp surprise. The tip of my
tongue, as though it had been pricked with needles, stung and tingled painfully. What possible
pleasure can human beings find in drinking such unpleasant stuff? I’ve heard my master
describe revolting food as not fit for a dog, but this dark drink is truly not fit for a cat. There
must be some fundamental antipathy between cats and beer. Conscious of danger, I quickly
withdrew my tongue. But then, on reflection, I remembered that men have a pet saying about
good medicines always tasting filthy and that the drafts they down to cure their colds invariably
make them grimace with disgust. I’ve never worked out whether they get cured by drinking
muck or whether they’d get well anyway without the face-making business. Now’s my chance to
find out. If drinking beer poisons my entire intestines, well, that will be just too bad: but if like
Sampei, I grow so cheerful as to forget everything around me, then I’ll accept the experience
as an unexpected joy and even, perhaps, I’ll teach all the cats of the neighborhood how sweet it
is to drown one’s woes in drink. Anyway, let’s take a chance and see.
     The decision made, I drooped my tongue out cautiously. But if I can actually see the bitter
liquid I find it hard to drink it; so closing my eyes tight shut, I began to lap.
     When, by sheer strength of will and tigerlike perseverance, I’d lapped away the beer-lees
in the first glass, a strange phenomenon occurred. The initial agony of my needled tongue
began to ease off and the ghastly feeling in my mouth, a feeling as if some hand were
squeezing my cheeks together from the outside, was pleasurably relieved. By the time I’d dealt
with the first glass, beer swilling was no longer much of a problem. I finished off the second
glass so painlessly that, while I was about it, I even lapped up all the spill on the tray and
slurped the whole lot down into my stomach.
     That done, in order to study my body’s reactions, I crouched down quietly for a while. My
body is gradually growing warm. I feel hot around my eyes and my ears are burning. I feel like
singing a song. I feel like dancing the Cat’s High Links. I feel like telling my master,
Waverhouse, and Singleman that they can all go to hell. I feel like scratching old man Goldfield.
I feel like biting his wife’s vast nose off. I feel like doing lots of things. And in the end I felt I’d
like to wobble to my feet. As I stood up, I felt I’d like to walk. Highly pleased with myself I felt
like going out. And as I staggered out, I felt like shouting, “Moon, old man, how goes it?” So I
did. Oh, but I felt wonderful!
     So this, I thought, is how it feels to be gloriously drunk. Radiant with glory, I persevered in
setting my unsteady feet one in front of each other in the correct order. Which is very difficult
when you have four feet. I made no effort to travel in any particular direction but just kept going
in long, slow wayward totter. I’m beginning to feel extremely sleepy, and indeed I hardly know if
I’m still walking or already sunk in sleep. I try to open my eyes, but their lids have grown
unliftably heavy. Ah, well, it can’t be helped. Confidently telling myself that nothing in this world,
neither seas nor mountains nor anything else, could now impede my cat-imperial progress, I put
a front paw forward when suddenly I hear a loud, sloppy splash. . . As I come to my senses, I
know that I’m done for.
     I had no time to work out how I’d been done for because, in the very moment that I realized
the fact of it, everything went haywire.
     When I again came to myself I found I was floating in water. Because I was also in pain I
clawed at what seemed its cause, but scratching water had no effect except to result in my
immediate submersion. I struck out desperately for the surface by kicking with my hind-legs and
scrabbling with my fore-paws. This action eventually produced a sort of scraping sound and, as
I managed to thrust my head just clear of the water, I saw that I’d fallen into a big clay jar
against whose side my claws had scraped.
      All through the summer this jar had contained a thick growth of water-hollyhocks, but in the
early autumn the crows had descended first to eat the plants and then to bathe in the water. In
the end their splashing about and the heat of the sun had so lowered the water level that the
crows found it difficult either to bathe or to drink, and they had stopped coming. I remember
that only the other day I was thinking that the water must have gone down because I’d seen no
birds about. Little did I then dream that I myself would be the next to splash about in that jar.
      From the water’s surface to the lip of the jar, it measures some five inches. However much
I stretch my paws I cannot reach the lip. And the water gives no purchase for a jump. If I do
nothing, I just sink. If I flounder around, my claws scrabble on the clay sides but the only result
is that scraping sound. It’s true that when I claw at the jar I do seem to rise a little in the water
but, as soon as my claws scrape down the clay, I slide back deep below the surface. This is so
painful that I immediately start scrabbling again until I break surface and can breathe. But it’s a
very tiring business, and my strength is going. I become impatient with my ill success, but my
legs are growing sluggish. In the end I can hardly tell whether I am scratching the jar in order to
sink or am sinking to induce more scratching.
      While this was going on and despite the constant pain, I found myself reasoning that I’m
only in agony because I want to escape from the jar.
      Now, much as I’d like to get out, it’s obvious that I can’t: my extended front leg is scarcely
three inches long and even if I could hoist my body with its outstretched fore-paws up above
the surface, I still could never hook my claws over the rim. Accordingly, since it’s blindingly clear
that I can’t get out, it’s equally clear that it’s senseless to persist in my efforts to do so. Only
my own senseless persistence is causing my ghastly suffering. How very stupid. How very, very
stupid deliberately to prolong the agonies of this torture.
      “I’d better stop. I just don’t care what happens next. I’ve had quite enough, thank you, of
this clutching, clawing, scratching, scraping, scrabbling, senseless struggle against nature.” The
decision made, I give up and relax: first my fore-paws, then my hind-legs, then my head and
tail.
      Gradually I begin to feel at ease. I can no longer tell whether I’m suffering or feeling
grateful. It isn’t even clear whether I’m drowning in water or lolling in some comfy room. And it
really doesn’t matter. It does not matter where I am or what I’m doing. I simply feel increasingly
at ease. No, I can’t actually say that I feel at ease, either. I feel that I’ve cut away the sun and
moon, they pull at me no longer; I’ve pulverized both Heaven and Earth, and I’m drifting off and
away into some unknown endlessness of peace. I am dying, Egypt, dying. Through death I’m
drifting slowly into peace. Only by dying can this divine quiescence be attained. May one rest in
peace! I am thankful, I am thankful. Thankful, thankful, thankful.
